Version of Record: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404817300810
Manuscript_6bceaadea936e3d63e04df05474d86ee

Phishing Environments, Techniques, and Countermeasures: A Survey
AHMED ALEROUD, YARMOUK UNIVERSITY, JORDAN
LINA ZHOU, UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY
Phishing has become an increasing threat in online space, largely driven by the evolving web, mobile, and social
networking technologies. Previous phishing taxonomies have mainly focused on the underlying mechanisms of
phishing but ignored the emerging attacking techniques, targeted environments, and countermeasures for
mitigating new phishing types. This survey investigates phishing attacks and anti-phishing techniques developed
not only in traditional environments such as e-mails and websites, but also in new environments such as mobile and
social networking sites. Taking an integrated view of phishing, we propose a taxonomy that involves attacking
techniques, countermeasures, targeted environments and communication media. The taxonomy will not only provide
guidance for the design of effective techniques for phishing detection and prevention in various types of
environments, but also facilitate practitioners in evaluating and selecting tools, methods, and features for handling
specific types of phishing problems.

Keywords: Phishing; Social engineering; Phishing detection; Mobile phishing; Social Networks phishing;
Honeypots; Ontology.

1. INTRODUCTION
Phishing is an attack wherein the attacker exploits social engineering techniques to perform
identity theft. Phishing traditionally functions by sending forged e-mail, mimicking an online
bank, auction or payment sites, guiding users to a bogus web page which is carefully
designed to look like the login to the genuine site (Jakobsson and Myers 2006; Kumar 2005;
Tally et al. 2004; Inomata et al. 2005; M. Wu et al. 2006a); Phishing aims to collect sensitive
and personal information such as usernames, passwords, credit card numbers, and even
money by impersonating a legitimate entity in the cyber space. (Ramzan and Wüest 2007)
characterize a phishing attack in three ways: 1) a legitimate entity must be spoofed; 2) the
spoofing process must involve a website, which distinguishes itself from some scams (e.g.,
muling); and 3) sensitive information about the entity must be solicited.
Phishing attacks, which are prevalent, could have serious consequences for their victims,
such as the loss of intellectual property and sensitive customer information, financial loss
and the compromise of national security (Ramzan and Wüest 2007) , as well as general
weakening trust (Litan 2005; Sullins 2006). According to CYREN report, the first quarter of
2015 witnessed a 51 percent increase in phishing sites (Mclean 2015). RSA identifies 52,554
phishing attacks in April, 2014, marking a 24% increase from the previous month. Phishing,
including spear phishing, has become such a serious problem that researchers and
practitioners strive to look for an effective way to mitigate its impact.
1.1. Scope Challenges

Phishing detection remains a challenging problem. This is primarily because phishing is
considered a semantics-based attack, which particularly exploits human vulnerabilities, but
not system vulnerabilities (Wu et al. 2006b), despite the fact that protection protocols
increase the probability of phishing attacks (Alsaid and Mitchell 2006; Oppliger and Gajek
2005; Bose and Leung 2008) Phishing belongs to unsolicited bulk email like spam, but the
latter is distinctly different in that it is mainly utilized for marketing or advertising products
(Toolan and Carthy 2010) (see appendix A). This current survey is focused on phishing. For
email phishing, phishers utilize Social Engineering and identity impersonation through
spoofing to steal legitimate users' passwords for fraudulent purposes (Jakobsson and
Soghoian 2009).

© 2017 published by Elsevier. This manuscript is made available under the Elsevier user license
https://www.elsevier.com/open-access/userlicense/1.0/

Social engineering relies heavily on human interaction and often involves using psychological
tricks aimed at making victims agree to things they would not have done normally. By
exploiting humans’ limited security knowledge or awareness, phishers deceive online users
into disclosing their sensitive information (e.g., passwords, credit card numbers, and other
sensitive information (Gouda et al. 2007), or inject suspicious content into their systems
(Berghel et al. 2007; Cova et al. 2008; Jakobsson and Myers 2006).The key to traditional
phishing is to attract users to visit a bogus web site, which can be effectively achieved
through a fake email. The weaknesses in web applications fuel phishing attempts; for
example, attackers can easily modify the “FROM” address in an email to make it look like
coming from a legitimate source. Thus, compared to the creation of viruses, worms or other
exploits, some phishing attempts are considered simple. However, phishing attack
techniques are evolving and becoming more sophisticated (Irani et al. 2008). There has been
an increasing trend of launching new phishing attacks through emerging technologies such
as mobile and social media (Marforio et al. 2015; Egele et al. 2013). The prevalent use of
social media provides fertile ground for phishing attacks due to increasing sharing of
personal information but little awareness and action of protecting the information (Borsack
and Lifson 2010). Studies show that phishing attacks increasingly focus on social networks
because they offer the greatest possibilities for success (Lemos 2014). Recent statistics shows
that mobile users around the globe download over 67 million apps every day. The large
numbers of mobile users and apps are not matched with high levels of security-awareness,
and it is a matter of time before online threats such as phishing become a reality on mobile
devices (Kessem 2012). Trend Micro already identified 4,000 phishing URLs designed for the
mobile web (Pajares and Abendan 2013). Other channels have also been exploited for
phishing such as Voice over IP (VoIP) technology (Gupta et al. 2015). For instance, the
frequency of unwanted calls has increased at an alarming rate. Telephone phishing can be
made at little or no cost at a scale and in an automated fashion similar to email phishing.
Therefore, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has received millions of complaints from
citizens about such unwanted and fraudulent calls. Some studies show that the economics of
phishing is far worse than it appears. Rather than sharing a fixed pool of dollars, phishing is
subject to the tragedy of the commons − the pool of dollars shrinks as a result of the efforts of
phishers (Herley and Florêncio 2009). One limitation of these studies is that they overlooked
uptime − an important metric of the damaging effect of phishing attacks and the success of
counter measures (Aaron and Rasmussen 2013) (See appendix B). Based on a statistics for
different time periods between 2008 and 2013 by anti-phishing Working Group, the average
uptime ranges between 23 and 72 hours (Aaron and Rasmussen 2013). Additionally, at hour
zero, only fewer than 20% of phishing attempts were identified by blacklists, and only 47~87%
of those phish got updated into the blacklist after 12 hours of occurrences (Sheng et al. 2009).
These data suggest that existing countermeasures remain ineffective and insufficient for
detecting phishing attacks. Therefore, providing a systematic survey of countermeasures and
phishing techniques can not only help to understand the state of phishing practice but also
inform future design of anti-phishing mechanisms.
1.2. Contributions
This survey provides a system review of extensive research on phishing techniques and
countermeasures. Previous surveys and taxonomies either concentrate on one specific aspect
of phishing such as anti-phishing tools (Abbasi et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2011a), or fail to
provide an integrated overview of research approaches to various phishing techniques
(Huajun et al. 2009; Wetzel 2005; Ollmann 2007a); The taxonomy proposed in this research
is multi-dimensional, which distinguishes itself from the previous ones that are focused on a
single dimension. In addition, the phishing environment covered in existing taxonomies is
limited to traditional channels such as e-mails and spoofed websites.
2

However, emerging communication channels in support of phishing, such as mobile apps,
online social networks, and Instant Messaging (IM) applications, are yet to be considered by
existing taxonomies and surveys (Hong 2012). To address these limitations, we propose a
phishing taxonomy that addresses phishing environments, techniques and corresponding
countermeasures. We identify the dimensions of phishing via the process lens. Particularly,
we identify the characteristics of phishing attacks in emergent communication media.
Moreover, we analyze anti-phishing techniques in relation to the communication media for
the first time. In view of the significant practical implications of phishing detection, we
introduce a comprehensive comparison between research anti-phishing tool and another
comparison between commercial anti-phishing tools. Additionally, we applied the dimensions
to analyze anti-phishing tools, and ranked the techniques based on their performance. The
analyses revealed several new categories of countermeasures that are missing from the
existing taxonomies, including human users, ontology, and search engine-based. For instance,
human users play an important part in the loop of phishing attacks, who can potentially
serve as the most effective line of defense. Further, we identified a number of phishing
problems that require future research and suggested possible solutions.
The rest of this survey is organized as follows. The next section provides a critical review
of extant phishing taxonomies. In section 3, we first examine phishing from the process
perspective. Based on each activity of the process, we propose one or more taxonomy
dimensions. We introduce our proposed taxonomy and its dimensions in section 4. In section
5 we provide a comprehensive review of extant anti-phishing techniques and discuss future
research issues in phishing detection. The final section concludes the survey.
2. EXISTING PHISHING TAXONOMIES
We adopted the snowballing approach for article selection. The literature search revealed
several existing phishing taxonomies and anatomies. (Wetzel 2005) provides an anatomy of
phishing attacks, but it ignores attack vectors and the environment where attacks occur.
(Ollmann 2007a) categorizes attack initialization techniques, victim data collection
techniques, and the communication media utilized in attack initialization; however, the
study makes no attempt at anti-phishing techniques. (Zhang et al. 2011a) solely focus on
countermeasures and classified them based on where the measures were applied. They also
ignore the effect of communication media in their discussion of client-server authentication
techniques. Similarly, (Huajun et al. 2009) classify anti-phishing strategies into three
categories based on the system architecture: server-side, browser-side, and online training
anti-phishing strategies. However, the classification of strategies is too generic to be made
operational. (Almomani et al. 2013) provide a countermeasure classification schema in e-mail
but ignore other attack environments. (Jakobsson and Myers 2006) provide a comprehensive
view of technological countermeasures for phishing without taking into account emergent
communication media and evolving attacking techniques over the past decade (see Appendix
F). While (Jakobsson and Myers 2006)were the first to comprehensively study the problem of
phishing and provide a framework for studying the attack and its defenses, the current
research analyzes countermeasures with respect to phishing techniques instead of the attack
phases. Our literature review reveals that existing studies on countermeasures have focused
on phishing problems in specific communication media without systematically examining the
distribution of countermeasure categories among communication media. For instance,
(Chandrasekaran et al. 2008) classify anti-phishing approaches in website communication
media into three categories, including browser plug-ins and anti-phishing toolbars, digital
signing and trust propagation schemes, and content-based detection techniques. The
classification not only ignores countermeasures in other types of media (e.g. e-mail, Online
Social Networks), but also overlooks the dependency of countermeasures on the
communication environment.
3

For instance, browser toolbars are not applicable for Voice over IP phishing, as prevention of
the latter type of attack requires multiple layers of protection (Griffin and Rackley 2008) A
summary of the coverage of existing phishing taxonomies is shown in Table I. The current
survey aims to address the limitations of previous taxonomies by proposing a new one.
Table I. Comparison of Existing Phishing Taxonomies

Communication media

(Wetzel (Jakobsson (Ollmann (Huajun et (Zhang et (Almomani
2005) and Myers 2007a)
al. 2009) al. 2011a) et al. 2013)
2006)
√
√
√
√

Attack Initialization Techniques

√

Data Collection Techniques
System Penetration Techniques
Target environment
Countermeasures

√

√
√

√

√

√

√

√

√

3. THE PHISHING PROCESS
To better inform the design of our phishing taxonomy, we anatomize phishing via the process
lens. The phishing attack process consists of five phases: attack planning, attack setup,
attack execution, fraud, and post attack phases (Wetzel 2005).

Fig. 1 Phishing process phases

Similarly, (Jakobsson and Myers 2006) divide the phishing process with reference to the
information flow of a phishing attack into fundamental step-by-step phases (see Appendix F).
They include attack preparation, sending a malicious payload via some propagation vector
such as a deceptive email, eliciting the user’s reaction which may subject his sensitive
information to being stolen, prompting user for his confidential information, compromising
the confidential information, transmitting the information to phisher, impersonating the
user, and finally eliciting monetary gain by a fraudulent party. Based on the similarities in
terms of involved activities (Abad 2005; Tally et al. 2004; Jakobsson and Myers 2006),
phishing attacks undergo three major phases − preparation, execution, and results
exploitation (see Figure 1). In this study, we refine each phase into its sub-processes by
incorporating new phishing trends; for instance, an attacker may perform feasibility analysis
that compares alternative communication media to be used to carry out a specific attack
material.
— Attack Preparation: Attackers initially select Communication Media for carrying out the
attack. The most frequently targeted medium is e-mail, but there are other targets such
as Instant Messengers (IM), mobile apps, social and voice media.
4

In addition, the attackers also select Target Devices (e.g. smart phones). Communication
Media and Target Devices comprise the environment in which phishing attacks are
initialized. Next, the attackers select attacking techniques, such as website spoofing, and
finally proceed with attack material preparation for future distribution. Attack
preparation can be performed either manually or with aid of some automated tools such
as phishing kits (Sponchioni 2015). Phishing kits may include pre-designed webpages for
popular companies, suspicious scripts for collecting user credentials, and hosting
mechanisms for phishing sites. The preparation of attack material depends on the
targeted environment. For instance; in case of e-mail, the attack material would be the email text or any other suspicious code embedded in the e-mail.
— Attack Execution: This phase consists of three sub-processes − attack material
distribution, target data collection, and target resource penetration. The attack material
can be distributed to one or more victim depending on the intended scope of attack. The
material distribution strategy also depends on the attack material and target device type.
For instance, if the attack material is in text and the target is a mobile device (Merwe et
al. 2005), wireless networks would be the preferred choices (Martinovic et al. 2007). The
target’s data collection will not start until the victim responds to the sent material as
expected by the phishers. Finally, the attackers may compromise system resources to ease
the process of collecting user information via means such as injecting clientside script into web pages (Jakobsson et al. 2007).
— Attack Results Exploitation: This is the last attack phase, when the data collected from
the target victim, such as his/her credentials, is used, usually to impersonate the victim.
Based on the in-depth analysis of the phishing process, we identified four dimensions of
phishing− Communication Media, Target Environments, Attack Techniques and
Countermeasures.
4. A NEW PHISHING TAXONOMY: AN INTEGRATED VIEW OF PHISHING
Drawing upon existing taxonomies and the process models of phishing attacks, we propose a
phishing taxonomy, as shown in Figure 2.

Fig. 2 The proposed phishing taxonomy

5

In the taxonomy, a phishing attack is described in four dimensions Communication Media,
Target Environments, Attack Techniques, and Countermeasures. We elaborate on the first
three dimensions in this section, and discuss countermeasures separately in the subsequent
section.
4.1 Communication media

Communication Media are the media of human interaction, with applications targeted by
attacks. Communication also covers any intermediate interfaces with which human users
interact (e.g. fake webpages).

Fig. 3 An illustration of phishing e-mail

We identify seven types of communication media from the literature, E-mails, Websites, IM,
Online Social Networks, Blogs and Forums, Mobile, and Voice over IP. Among them, emails
and websites are most frequently studied.
— Emails. A common phishing practice in emails is asking users to update their account
information. However, when users hover over the link, it does not lead to the
organization's actual website but a phishing trap site instead. A phishing email, disguised
as an official email from PayPal, is illustrated in Figure 3.
— Websites. The spoofed e-mail may then utilize social engineering and contextual
information about targets to direct users to a bogus webpage (Jakobsson and Myers 2006).
A fake webpage and its corresponding legitimate version are illustrated in Figure 4.
Although the two pages are visually similar, the faked version (Figure 4a) differs from
legitimate one (Figure 4b) in several aspects: 1) its URL contains HTTP instead of HTTPS,
and only the latter transfers data through a secured connection that encrypts data by a
secure certificate known as SSL (Secure Sockets Layer). The encryption prevents thirdparties from eavesdropping on communications to and from the server; 2) a padlock icon
at the beginning of the URL is missing, indicating that the website being accessed is not
secure; and 3) the URL itself contains a fake domain (e.g., gmall-imp-info2.com) which is
not the real domain.
— IM. In IM, phishing attacks are usually accomplished through suspicious URLs (Ying and
Xuhua 2006). In addition, a phisher tries to collect password and security related
information through asking questions by pretending to be a trustworthy chat-mate
through voice chat, text chat or a combination of both.

6

An empirical study of the spread of some ‘worms’ over the social graph of IM users reveals
that over 14 million distinct users clicked on suspicious URLs over a two-year period. In
addition, 95% of users who clicked on the URLs became infected with malware (Moore and
Clayton 2015). Among the 50~110 malicious URLs gathered per day using a honeypot, 93%
of phishing sites were not found in popular blacklists.

Fig. 4a A faked page (Source: phish tank)1

Fig. 4b A legitimate page

— Online Social Networks (e.g. Facebook and Twitter) have witnessed a rapid growth of
phishing attacks for several reasons (Yu et al. 2008): 1) ease of impersonating profiles, 2)
users’ willingness to trust, and 3) popularity of social networking sites. One recent study
(Stern 2014) shows that, 22% of phishing scams on the web target Facebook. Additionally,
the phishing sites imitating social networking websites comprised over 35% of all cases
that triggered anti-phishing components.
— Blogs and Forums. According to Microsoft security and safety center (Microsoft 2016a),
news groups and online-ads scams are exploited in the event of a natural disaster, or a
national election. Faked e-card, online job-hunting scams, and donation scams are some
examples of phishing attacks that target blogs and forums. For instance, online jobhunting scams are used to collect the credentials of job hunters. In general those ads
represent the names of spoofed organizations and are displayed on various job search
sites. If a user shows an interest in an ad, he is either requested to provide his
credentials, or depending on his interaction, his credit card would be charged for a fake
job service. Donation phishing exploits social, political, or natural events to request
donations using a well-known identity. When users interact with those phishing
attempts, they will also be asked to provide information of their credit cards.
— Mobile Platform. When using the internet or downloading mobile apps, mobile users may
be targeted by phishing attacks similar to those from personal computers (PC). Phishing
attempts on mobile devices are harder to identify by users, because it is difficult to
discern whether a page is legitimate or not when looking at devices with small screens
where the complete URL is not visible (Canova et al. 2015). Mobiles Apps and Mobile
Instant Messaging (MIM) (Goel et al. 2014) are the main media utilized by attackers to
initialize mobile phishing attempts. In Mobile Apps, the attackers redirect users to fake
apps interfaces through which users provide their sensitive information (Felt and
Wagner 2011). (Marforio et al. 2015) classify attacks on Mobile Apps into five types −
similarity, forwarding, background, notification, and floating attacks.

1

https://www.phishtank.com/

7

In similarity attack the phishing app has UI features that are similar to the legitimate
one. This category of attacks has been reported on both Android and iOS devices. In
forwarding attack, the attackers take the advantage of the forwarding functionality of
Android apps. For instance, a suspicious app may ask the user to share a high score in a
game on a social networking site and access the network app through a button on the
screen. When the user taps the button, the suspicious app does not initiate the social
network app, but instead launches the phishing app. In background attack, the phishing
app functions in the background and uses Activity Manager on Android to control other
running apps. When the user launches the legitimate app, the phishing app triggers
itself to the foreground and displays a phishing UI. In notification attacks, the attacker
presents a spoofed notification and prompts the user to enter his account information. In
floating attacks, the attackers take advantage of Android functionalities that allow an
app to draw an activity on top of the app in the foreground. For instance, a phishing app
that has the system alert window permission can present an input field on top of the
password input field of the legitimate app. The UI of the legitimate app that remains
visible to the user has no way to detect the new input field. When the user taps on the
password field, the focus is transferred to the phishing app which obtains the password
entered by the user.
— Voice over IP (aka Vishing (Ollmann 2007b)) attacks such as Automatic Dialing, Manual
Dialing, and Telemarketing Calls, are utilized to guide callees to a service which does not
exist in reality. Overall, vishers exploit vulnerabilities of the Voice over IP infrastructure.
Vishing attacks are evolving owing to the growth of mobile technologies, Voice over IP
protocols, and the automated Interactive Voice Response (IVR) services (Griffin and
Rackley 2008). Some Security Agencies in the US have identified several techniques that
are used to implement vishing attacks (FBI 2010). Initiating vishing requires relatively
less effort compared to other environments. Such attacks are conducted by attackers who
utilize vulnerabilities in the integration mechanism between Digital Private Branch
Exchange (PBX) tools and Voice over IP technology. If those vulnerabilities exist, the
system can be initiated as an auto dialer and it may generate spoofed calls to hundreds of
customers on hourly basis. One variant of telemarketing calls in vishing is the callee
being directed to dial costly numbers, where he provides his credentials. Another variant
is the voice pharming attack (Wang et al. 2008), where an active adversary in the Voice
over IP along with one or more accomplices subvert the victims’ Voice over IP calls and
divert them to a bogus IVR or representative. The voice pharming attack eliminates the
bogus phone number used in vishing via transparent call diversion, just as pharming
attack eliminates the bogus URL used in phishing via transparent web traffic diversion
(Wang et al. 2008).
4.2 Target environments

The target environment is the physical device by which victims interact online. Device type
plays a major role in selecting attacking strategies. For instance if the attacker wants to
deceive mobile users he/she has to adapt specific techniques for particular types of devices
(e.g. mobile devices (Felt and Wagner 2011)). We classified Target Environments of phishing
attacks into three categories: personal computers (PC), smart devices, and typical voice
devices such as desk or soft phones. The targeted environments impose constraints on the
types of attacks that could be initiated. For instance, while it is common to attack PCs
through spoofed websites, it requires more sophisticated techniques to fake mobile web
browsers and mobiles apps (Felt and Wagner 2011). Likewise, (Griffin and Rackley 2008)
discuss several steps to initialize Voice over IP (Vishing) attacks. Initially, the attacker must
gain unauthorized access to a computer with Internet. Once the attacker has control of host,
a Digital Private Branch Exchange (PBX) needs to be installed (e.g. Skype).
8

Lastly, an attacker needs the ability to record the phone conversation. This functionality is
built into most digital PBX software. An attacker cannot utilize an existing phone number
but can configure his own number to reflect the entity of his choice. He could employ any
number not in use, and make it appear to be a trusted organization calling from that number.
This simple configuration within the PBX software could be very convincing to potential
victims. At some point the attacker can expand criminal activities by crossing over to the
analog phone world. This can be accomplished by purchasing a hardware device that bridges
the digital session initiation protocol (SIP) to the publically switched telephone network
(PSTN).
Phishing attacks have recently targeted the Wi-Fi networks (Song et al. 2010). The
attack is initialized through attacker’s association with the Wi-Fi clients unknowingly. The
users are presented with an authentication interface that looks legitimate (e.g., an interface
that is similar to the one used by a legitimate Access Point (AP)). The interface is usually a
login page for a free internet service (e.g., Fake captive portals in airports, hotels,
universities, etc.). Information about the targeted network such as the web browser and the
operating system of the victim, the encryption type, and the MAC address of the AP are
collected from the Beacon Frame and the User-Agent header (application layer). By knowing
the router manufacturer, a fake router configuration pages can be presented to the victims.
Target environments have social as well as technical implications for phishing. For
instance, mobile users have greater likelihood to fall to phishing attacks than PC users (Niu
et al. 2008). Mobile devices are always on and in most cases physically close-by. Their owners
tend to check their communications close to real time, and thus become victimized by
phishing attacks. Additionally, mobile users are accustomed to entering their credentials into
simple interfaces on their devices; in fact, 40% of smartphone users enter passwords into
their phones at least once a day. Although modern mobile devices come with first-class web
browsers that rival with their desktop counterparts in power and popularity, mobile
browsers are particularly susceptible to attacks on web authentication, such as phishing or
Touchjacking (Luo and Jin 2012).
(Baset 2016) introduces a new form of social engineering attacks which utilizes Quick
Response Code Login Jacking (QRLJacking) to initialize phishing on the pages that rely on
the “Login with QR code” feature such as mobile social networks (Guo et al. 2016). In its
simplest form, the victim scans the attacker’s QR code instead of the real one, which results
in session hijacking. The attack is executed in several steps, which include cloning the Login
QR Code into a phishing website, sending the phishing page to the victim, and then scanning
the QR Code by the victim using a Mobile App. When these steps are successful, the service
exchanges all victim’s data with the attacker’s session. (Braun et al. 2014) have shown that
existing countermeasures from desktop computers cannot be easily transferred to the mobile
world. However, such the significance of device type on the probability of phishing attack
success has not yet been studied.
4.3 Attack Techniques

Based on the purpose of the techniques, we group attack techniques into three categories:
attack initialization, data collection, and system penetration.
4.3.1 Attack Initialization Techniques

Attack initialization techniques, such as those analyzing the social context of the victim, are
used in preparing attack material (Jagatic et al. 2007). Attack initialization techniques are
categorized by two types: technical and behavioral. A predominant method in the technical
category involves embedding a suspicious URL into spoofed emails (Drake et al. 2004;
Ollmann 2007b). Social engineering exemplifies this behavioral category which is aimed at
deceiving users into disclosing their personal information (Guan et al. 2009; Drake et al.
2004; Chandrasekaran et al. 2008; Felten et al. 1997).
9

We identify several techniques for attack initialization, such as Spoofed URLs, Bogus IVR,
Social Networking, Man in the Middle Attack (MITM), Spear Phishing, Spoofing Mobile
Browsers, and Embedded Web Contents.
— Spoofed URLs most likely target e-mail users. Sample URL spoofing techniques include
bad domain name, shortened URL, host name obfuscation, and encoded URL obfuscation
(Berghel et al. 2007) (see a summary in Appendix G).
— Bogus IVR attacking techniques are utilized to initialize voice-based phishing attacks
(Wang et al. 2008).
— Social Networking Techniques are used in social network phishing. Phishers can gain
control of a user’s email or social networking account in a number of ways.
First, sending a genuine-looking email or message from the site that requests the user to
‘confirm’ the username and password for his/her social networking accounts via an
attached URL (Wüest 2010). Once the phisher gains control of the user’s account, he/she
can change the password. Phishers use this information to send bogus emails or messages
that look like they are from the registered user to request money or gain access to other
users’ accounts.
Second, the creation of fake profiles, which appear to be from friends of the victims, can be
sent to users as spoofed messages (Kontaxis et al. 2011).
Third, attackers use social networking walls or official pages to post phishing URLs (Liu
et al. 2011a; Chen et al. 2014; Navarro and Jasinski 2014)
Fourth, Reverse Social Engineering (Irani et al. 2011; Krombholz et al. 2015; Abawajy
2014), one of the new phishing techniques that target social networks. It is implemented
through exploiting friends’ recommendation list to invite victims to add, as friends, the
cloned profiles recommended by the social networks; once added by victims, attackers can
exploit such friendships to send messages including information about the victims’ social
contexts.
— Man in the Middle Attack (MITM) techniques (Joshi et al. 2008; Bicakci et al. 2014). In
MITM, phishers position themselves between the victim and the legitimate site. As a
result, the messages submitted to the legitimate site are passed to phishers instead, and
such information usually represents valuable credentials. Although SSL web traffic is
generally not vulnerable to MITM, a malware-based attack can modify a system
configuration to install a trusted certificate authority in which a MITM can create its own
certificate for any SSL-protected site, decrypt the traffic and extract confidential
information, and re-encrypt the traffic to communicate with the other side. There are two
main models of MITM (Karapanos and Capkun 2014): MITM+certificate and MITM+key.
In MITM+certificate, the attacker holds a valid certificate for the domain of the target
web server, binding the identity of the server to the public key, of which he holds the
corresponding private key. The attacker, however, has no access to the private key of the
target web server. This can happen if the attacker compromises a Certificate Authority
(CA) or is able to force a CA issue such a certificate. In MITM+key, the attacker holds the
private key of the legitimate server. While it is not easy to compromise the server key,
such attacks are feasible, as demonstrated in the Heartbleed vulnerability in OpenSSL,
and can be very stealthy, remaining unnoticed.
Spear or Organization Phishing. The technique is an attempt that mainly targets a
specific organization in order to collect the credentials of its users, financial, or other
sensetive information (Aycock 2007; Peterson 2011). Unlike other phishing attemtps,
spear phishing attacks require understanding of the organization’s context to create
effective phishing emails. Thus, spear-phishing is a directed and under-the-radar attack.
According to a report by the APWG (Aaron and Rasmussen 2013), the year of 2011 shows
a significant increase in the rate of spear phishing attacks.

10

The report also shows that in 2013, the pro-Assad Syrian Electronic Army (SEA) utilized a
spear-phishing approach to obtain the credentials of a domain name reseller. Then they
redirected the domains of several well-known media channels. While it has been shown
that the number of spear phishing attempts has declined in 2014 and 2015 compared to
2013 (73 emails per day compared to 83 per day), this does not necessarily mean that
users are more aware about spear phishing (Infosec-Institute 2015). It mainly indicates
that there is a change in the strategies utilized by attackers to create those attempts and
the way they select their campaigns.
Spear phishing attempts target several types of organizations; According to a recent
report by Symantec (Nahorney 2015), the top industries targeted by spear phishing are
mainly finance, insurance and real estate. Spear phishing also has high stakes. A recent
study shows that the financial benefit of spear phishing attacks tripled while that of
conventional phishing attacks dropped by more than half (Caputo et al. 2014)(see
summary in Appendix C). (Jagatic et al. 2007)also show that using user profiles from
online social networks to prepare phishing emails, improves the success rate to 72% from
16% when social context was not utilized.
— Spoofing Mobile Browsers and Embedded Web Contents, in which the web content is
rendered as part of the interface of a mobile app (Felt and Wagner 2011, Wu and Wu
2016). Those attack initialization techniques are mainly applicable to smart devices.
4.3.2 Data Collection Techniques

Techniques used to collect data from victims occur during and after the victim’s interaction
with attacks material. Victim’s data collection techniques are used in gathering user data
during and after the victim’s interaction with attacks material (Ollmann 2007a). The data
collection can be carried out either manually or automatically. Automated data collection
techniques mainly rely on creating Fake Web Forms, Key Loggers, Recorded Messages,
Automated Social Engineering Bots, and Fake Event Invitations to gather data.
— Automated data collection: Fake Web Forms are the most commonly used automated
technique for data collection in web spoofing (Wenyin et al. 2005). Other techniques such
as Recorded Messages gather data from user interaction with IVR when attacks are
initialized via phones or other Voice over IP attacks (Wang et al. 2008). In social
networks, the public data about users is utilized to harvest data necessary to initialize
social engineering attacks (Huber et al. 2009). Social engineering process generally starts
with collecting background information on potential targets. Despite the several online
sources that are typically used to collect the information about potential victims,
nowadays attackers increasingly exploit user profiles from social networking sites such
as Facebook owing to the explosive use of social networking sites. Additionally, social
networking sites facilitate automating attacks by providing data in a machine- readable
form. Further, online social networks also serve as communication platforms by offering
services such as private messaging and chats which can be exploited by Automated
Social Engineering Bots for data collection (Huber et al. 2009). Fake Event Invitations
performs by tailoring to the target users’ motivations (Ferrara 2013). For instance,
members of LinkedIn (a professional networking site) who identify themselves as
business owners send fake event invitations to target users, asking them to provide
private information for fake job positions.
— Manual data collection is carried out through Human Deception or other simpler
techniques such as Relationships within Social Networks. Human deception collects
sensitive data about victims through direct interaction (Dhamija et al. 2006).

11

4.3.3 System Penetration Techniques

System penetration techniques are used to exploit system resources for facilitating phishing
attack initialization (Emigh 2005; Jakobsson and Myers 2006). System penetration
techniques are in general used along with other types of cyber-attacks but not limited to
phishing. We identified two main system penetration techniques: Fast-Flux and Cross Site
Scripting.
— Fast Flux (FF). FF is not a direct attack, but rather a DNS-related technique that protects
phishing sites from taking down by hiding the hosting machine of phishing websites.
DNS-based phishing refers to any form of phishing that tries to spoof the process of
finding the real domain name (Jakobsson and Myers 2006; McGrath et al. 2009; Moore
and Clayton 2007; Zhou et al. 2008)which includes host files poisoning, and polluting the
user's DNS cache with spoofed location. In FF networks, instead of revealing the
addresses of the hosting machine of a phishing sites, front-end proxy hosts are used to
transmit requests to another server which is the real host of the phishing site (Hsu et al.
2010). As such, several compromised front-end hosts (bots) are needed. In addition, a
mapping of the phishing domain name to front-end proxies is performed. To make the
process more ambiguous, FF networks perform domain name resolution over a short
duration (see Appendix D). This is important in order to avoid tracing the attack back the
hosting machine.
— Content Injection via Cross Site Scripting (XSS) and Request Forgery (CSRF). XSS can be
initialized using different techniques, for instance, the attacker may inject malicious code
into a benign website by loading it onto a valid server as part of a client review or a webbased email. Alternatively, the code may be injected into a URL and sent to user as an
email (see Appendix E). When the user taps the URL, the content will be transmitted to
the benign sever and then returned as part of a request of user credentials (Ramzan 2010).
CSRF is yet another type of injection attacks that can be initiated as part of phishing
campaigns. The attacker sends emails to victims to lure them into visiting a web page
that is under attacker control (Blatz 2007, Nagar and Suman 2016). The attacker hides
several executable elements in his page (e.g., Java scripts blocks) which will make a
request to the target application. This automatically appends session token to the request
when the victim is logged in to the application at that time. The application will
automatically perform whatever action the attacker requested.

5. COUNTERMEASURES
Countermeasures aim at preventing/detecting attacks before/after victim data is
collected/used. We discuss countermeasures for phishing detection and prevention separately
in this section. Based on the underlying techniques, we categorize the countermeasures into
five major categories − Machine Learning, Text Mining, Human Users, Profile Matching, and
Others. The others category is further broken down into Ontology, Honeypot, Search Engine,
and Client Server-based Authentication. In addition to countermeasure techniques, we also
discuss communication media where the techniques have been applied. Further, we examine
the practical application and performance of countermeasures by anti-phishing tools.
5.1 Machine Learning

This type of approaches focuses on applying machine learning and data mining techniques to
phishing detection. These related techniques are classified into three main categories:
Classification, Clustering, and Anomaly Detection.

12

5.1.1 Classification techniques

Classification techniques try to map inputs (features or variables) to desired outputs
(response) using a specific function. In the case of classifying phishing emails, a model is
created to categorize an email into phishing or legitimate by learning certain characteristics
of the email. The classification-based countermeasures rely on using labeled datasets of
phishing and legitimate instances (e.g. e-mail or webpages). A training model m learns
patterns from the training samples using a vector of relevant features = | , … , |, which
consists of content and/or URL-based features. Some quality measures are used to assess
classification performance of the trained model m on test samples e. Most phishing detection
applies statistical classifiers which use function ( , ) to classify the instances of e in a way
that recognizes the relationship between t and e using some optimization criteria, where is
a vector of adjustable parameters. The values of are determined using the selected
optimization criteria. Based on types of features that are used to discover phishing (see
appendix H), phishing classifiers can be grouped into three main categories:
— Classifiers based on URL features (Bergholz et al. 2008; Garera et al. 2007; Gyawali et al.
2011; Cheng et al. 2011; Ma et al. 2009; Huh and Kim 2012; Xiang et al. 2011; Choi et al.
2011; Bulakh and Gupta 2016, Zhang et al. 2011b) such as domain name, IP address
characteristics, and geographic properties. URL related features have been used as inputs
to several classification techniques for phishing detection, such as Support Vector
Machine, Naïve Bayes, and k-Nearest Neighbor. Among them, the k-Nearest Neighbor
produces the best accuracy in one study (Huh and Kim 2012).
— Classifiers based on textual features (Zhang et al. 2007a). These approaches examine the
content of suspicious material to determine whether it is legitimate or phishing. For
instance, the detection of phishing in a website can operate on features extracted from the
textual content of the main page, its component files, and DOM structure.
— Classifiers based on hybrid features (Andre et al. 2010; Khonji et al. 2011; Whittaker et al.
2010; Aggarwal et al. 2012) Several classifiers are built on hybrid features that are
extracted from both content and URL in webpages for phishing detection (Abu-Nimeh et
al. 2007; R. B. Basnet et al. 2011; Miyamoto et al. 2008) Some methods within this
category focus on creating dynamic, adaptive, or ensemble classifiers. Compared with
static classifiers, dynamic classifiers are focused on adapting classification rules.
(L'Huillier et al. 2009) used an online support vector machine approach that utilizes game
theory and previous knowledge to create a phishing detection classifier. A similar
adaptive topic model based classification has been proposed for detecting phishing in an email environment (André et al. 2010). (Sanglerdsinlapachai and Rungsawang 2010) have
explored ensemble methods for phishing detection that relies on the decisions of more
than one classifier. Most of classification approaches have been applied to detecting
phishing in websites, and some to emails (Gansterer and Pölz 2009; Saberi et al. 2007)
and voice using Gaussian mixture (Chang and Lee 2010).

5.1.2 Clustering techniques

Clustering-based countermeasures partition a set of instances into phishing and legitimate
clusters. The objective of clustering is to group objects based on their similarities. If each
object is represented as a node, and the similarities between different objects are measured
based on their shared common features, then a clustering algorithm can be used to identify
groups (of nodes) of similar observations. The number of groups can be chosen so that nodes
in the same group have higher similarity than nodes in different groups. The information
about such a clustering structure is in turn used to assign new objects to the right cluster.
New objects are assigned to a cluster based on their similarity with other instances under
analysis.
13

Formally, assume that = | , … , | represents a set of web-pages, where each page
is
represented as a feature vector ( , … , ) , in which
is either a content or URL-based
feature. The purpose of clustering is to create a structure that best separates phishing from
legitimate pages, and then use such a structure to cluster new pages. Two important
components of a clustering method are the similarity (distance) measure between two data
samples (e.g. pages , ) and the clustering algorithm. Different similarity/distance
measures can lead to different clustering results. Domain knowledge can be used to guide the
formulation of a similarity/distance measure. For high dimensional data, Minkowski Metric
is a popular measure:
,

=

,

−

,

(1)

where ! is the dimensionality of the data. There are several special cases when,
•
= 2: Euclidean distance
•
= 1: Manhattan distance
•
− ∞: Super distance
Several clustering algorithms have been used for phishing detection, such as DBscan, kmeans, and Self-organizing-maps (see (Jain et al. 1999; Murtagh 1983) for more details).
DBscan has been employed to detect phishing targets by clustering a webpage set consisting
of a given webpage and all of its associated webpages (Liu et al. 2010). The relationships
between
and its associated webpages are determined based on links, ranking, text
similarity, and webpage layout similarity, which are used as the input features for clustering.
The clustering method aims to discover a cluster shaped around to identify as phishing,
which would in turn trigger the process of discovering the legitimate webpage $ attacked by
creating ―a fake version of $ . Otherwise, the page is identified as legitimate. Like
classification, clustering based anti-phishing techniques have involved a variety of input
features and communication media. In addition to URL-based features (Cheng et al. 2011)
and content features (Liping et al. 2009), clustering of phishing has also incorporated
features extracted from website images (Kuan-Ta et al. 2009). Clustering has been applied in
detecting attacks in several communication media such as phishing e-mails (Yearwood et al.
2009), spoofed websites (Kuan-Ta et al. 2009), and voice-based phishing attempts (Chang
and Lee 2010).

5.1.3 Anomaly detection techniques

Anomaly is a pattern in data that is not consistent with the schemes of normal behavior
(Chandola et al. 2009). The anomaly-based approaches to phishing detection essentially treat
phishing attempts as outliers. Every website claims a unique identity in the cyberspace
either explicitly or implicitly. When a phishing site maliciously claims a false identity, it
always demonstrates abnormal behaviors compared to a legitimate site, as manifested in
some DOM objects in web pages and HTTP transactions (Nguyen et al. 2014). Anomaly
detection algorithms discover phishing websites by capturing those anomalies (see (Ying and
Xuhua 2006)). Anomaly detection methods assign a score to the suspicious material under
analysis by comparing the features of phishing material with those of one or more nearest
neighbors. If the anomaly score goes above a cut-off point, the webpage would be classified as
phishing.

14

Alternatively, one-class anomaly detection assumes that all training samples belong to a
single class (i.e. the legitimate email). Accordingly, it creates a discriminative margin around
the instances that correspond to legitimate class. One-Class SVM (Schölkopf et al. 2001) has
been applied to phishing detection (Chandrasekaran et al. 2006). It treats the origin as the
only member of the second class (the potential phishing email). If % , %& , … % are training
emails that belong to the legitimate class ' , where ' is a compact subset of ( ) , then Φ: ' → is a kernel mapping which transforms the email features in E into feature space H. To
separate a dataset from the origin, one needs to solve a quadratic programming problem. The
solution parameters set an upper bound on the fraction of phishing emails and a lower bound
on the number of trainings from the legitimate emails used as Support Vector.
Table II: Anomaly clues in phishing pages

Clue in the URL
Includes redirection
The path contains a URL of a known
organization
Confused URL with non-valid pattern
Special characters “-“ in the host name
Long domain name
Hostname is Encoded
IP is Encoded
E-mail Address in URL

Example
http://3104.nnu4urye.info?http://c43n34.com?35u3b
http://108.179.216.140/~ bankofamerica/
http://sparkleyourcake.com/www.paypal.fr/
http://yj4yb6hmb3.x-cant-bank-you-here-of-my
money.cn/yj4yb6hmb3/Oraliao_show_23Y.
http://31837.9hzaseruijintunhfeugandeikisn.com/5/54878
http://www.%64isc%72%65%74%2done-%6ei%67h%
74.%63o%6d
http://0x42.0x1D.0x25.0xC2/
http://username@hotmail.com.fddcol.com

TABLE III: Machine learning-based countermeasures and their applied communication media
Type and Features

URL

Classification

Content

Clustering

Anomaly
Detection

Voice
Images
URL
&content

Media: Article
Web: (Ma et al. 2009), (Huh and Kim 2012),
(Choi et al. 2011), (Garera et al. 2007)
(Gyawali et al. 2011), (Cheng et al. 2011)
(Le et al. 2011)
Email: (André et al. 2010), (L'Huillier et al. 2010)
Social networks: (Aggarwal et al. 2012)
Web: (Whittaker et al. 2010), (Zhang et al. 2007b)
Email:, (André et al. 2010) (L'Huillier et al. 2010)
(Bazarganigilani 2011)
(Khonji et al. 2011), (Sanchez and Duan 2012)
Social networks: (Aggarwal et al. 2012)
IM:( Ding et al. 2011)
Voice over IP: (Chang and K. Lee 2010)
Web: (Kuan-Ta et al. 2009)
Web: (Liu et al. 2010), (Liping et al. 2009)
Email: (Yearwood et al. 2009), (Zhuang et al. 2012)

URL

Web: (Ying and Xuhua 2006),
IM: (Guan et al. 2009)

Content

Web: (Ying and Xuhua 2006),
Email: (Chandrasekaran et al. 2008)

Most anomaly detection approaches to discovering phishing in spoofed websites focus on
identifying abnormal signs that are more likely to be present in the URLs (Guan et al. 2009;
Ying and Xuhua 2006; Chandrasekaran et al. 2006).
Sample clues are shown in Table II. Anomaly detection techniques have been used in
other types of media such as IM. (Guan et al. 2009) extract features based on the regularity
in patterns of sending messages, the time between instant messages, the anomaly patterns
in the URLs, and the temporal regularity of sender behavior to detect phishing.

15

Table III summarizes machine learning based phishing detection approaches, their input
features, and application context. It is shown that classification is the dominant method for
phishing detection, and the classification models generally draw features from the content
and/or URLs of web pages or emails. Moreover, it is interesting to note that the phishing
detection in emails mostly relies on content-based features, and the detection in websites on
URL-based features. Additionally, it is revealed that a relatively small number of studies
have applied clustering techniques to phishing; nevertheless, some features such as image
and voice have only been explored in phishing clustering so far. Further, anomaly detection
techniques have been used to detect phishing in IM as well as websites and emails.
Nevertheless, it is shown from Table III that machine learning based countermeasures for
phishing in websites and e-mails are studied much more frequently than IM, voice and social
networks.

5.2 Text mining

Text mining refers to utilizing data mining and machine learning techniques to discover
trends, patterns, or useful knowledge from the text (Berry and Castellanos 2004). Text
mining identifies phishing attempts by analyzing the patterns of suspicious material, which
include but are not limited to the content of e-mails, websites, URLs, Instant Messages, and
SMS.
Three types of text mining techniques have been applied in phishing detection: Term
Frequency Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), Regular Expressions (RE), and Latent
Semantic Analysis (LSA) and Topic Models. While such techniques could be grouped under
the machine learning category, they are usually used as pre- and/or post-processing steps in
creating other phishing detection solutions.
Essentially, the TF-IDF weighting scheme discovers the weight of a word in a set of
documents by finding its relative frequency in one document compared to its inverse
proportion over a referenced set of documents. The TF-IDF intuitively determines the weight
of a given term with respect to a particular document (e.g., a webpage or an e-mail). For
instance, the terms that are commonly used in spoofed e-mails tend to have higher TF-IDF
weights than their legitimate counterparts. Given a set of e-mails ' = {% ,…,% }and terms
0 = { ,…, }, the TF-IDF weight of term in e-mail % is calculated as follows:
|'|
123 ,4 = 23 ,4 × 678 9 : (2)
23 )

where 23,4 is the number of times term occur in e-mail % , |'| is the total number of e-mails,
and 23,) denotes the number of e-mails that contains term . The TF-IDF approach has been
mainly used for websites. (Zhang et al. 2007b) propose a technique called CANTINA that
utilizes TF-IDF instead of the URLs and domain names to discover phishing attempts.
(Xiang and Hong 2009) use TF-IDF and search engines to discover the actual domain of a
page by analyzing the features of its declared identity. The extracted features of the claimed
domain are used to run a query on search engines. If the query retrieves results, the two
identities would be considered as similar and accordingly the pages would be classified as
legitimate. This line of research continues by exploiting other features of the page to
determine its identity such as features extracted from the DOM structure, element nodes
that represent the site brand name, and page keywords. (Xiang et al. 2011).

16

REs provide flexible means for matching strings of text. In phishing detection, REs have
been used to generate patterns of phishing URLs from the existing pages (Fu et al. 2006a;
Prakash et al. 2010). These patterns can in turn be used to match the new phishing URLs.
REs are helpful to generate blacklist databases and eventually handle frequent minor
changes in phishing patterns. LSA relies on identifying latent relationships between
keywords, such as synonyms and homonyms, and hence it is useful to detect related words in
the same context. LSA and topic models have been used in many text mining applications.
LSA is based on the principle that words which are used in the same context tend to have
similar meanings. Topic modeling treats documents as mixtures of latent topics, and the
topics are in turn represented as probability distribution over words in the training dataset.
Such topics have been used as features in classification-based phishing detection (e.g.
(L'Huillier et al. 2010; Ramanathan and Wechsler 2012).
Table IV: Text mining-based countermeasures and their applied communication media
Type

Media: Article

TF-IDF

Web: (Zhang et al. 2007b), (Xiang and Hong 2009), (Xiang et al.
2011)

Regular
Expressions(RE)

Web: (Prakash et al. 2010), (Fu et al. 2006a), (Bartoli et al. 2014)
Email: (Kerremans et al. 2005)

Latent Semantic
Analysis(LSA)
and Topic Modeling

Email: (Ramanathan and Wechsler 2012), (Bhakta and Harris
2015) (L'Huillier et al. 2010)
Mobile: (Modupe et al. 2014)

Table IV summarizes text mining-based phishing detection studies. The table shows that the
detection of email phishing has leveraged LSA technique. By contrast, phishing detection in
websites has focused on TF-IDF techniques. This may be due to the lack of context in web
URLs and the wide diversity of web page content.

5.3 Human Users

Human-based countermeasures and behavioral factors that characterize who falls in
phishing are very significant for preventing phishing attacks. User studies, which aim to
measure user response to phishing material, have considered behavioral factors (Blythe et al.
2011; Downs et al. 2007; Kumaraguru et al. 2007b; Sheng et al. 2010), and demographic
factors (Carlson 2006). These studies typically involve users for phishing identification. Most
user studies are conducted using anti-phishing systems; nevertheless, some of them provide
mechanisms to either increase user awareness when faced with phishing attacks, or involve
them in phishing detection.
5.3.1 Increasing user awareness

Our lack of security awareness can be misused by attackers to deceive human victims. A
variety of factors have been found to have an effect on human security awareness, including
experiential factors such as user’s security knowledge (Jakobsson et al. 2007), web experience,
computer self-efficacy, and dispositional factors such as user’s disposition to trust, perceived
risk, and suspicion of humanity (Downs et al. 2007). (Wright and Marett 2010; Sun et al.
2016) suggest that experiential factors such as security knowledge, web experience, and
computer self-efficacy lower the likelihood of a person being deceived by phishing e-mails.
Out of dispositional factors only suspicion of humanity lowers the likelihood of deception.
There are two main approaches to increase security awareness: Training and Educating
users and IQ Test Experiments.

17

— Training and Education is accomplished by educating users how to detect phishing
attacks while they are doing regular activities on their email systems (Kumaraguru et al.
2007a), or avoid becoming a victim of phishing (Dodge et al. 2007; Garera et al. 2007;
Herzberg and Jbara 2008; Herzberg and Margulies 2011; Arachchilage et al. 2016). One
form of such training is to send users certain security notices about phishing attacks.
(Kumaraguru et al. 2007a) found that training embedded in e-mails with text and graphic
notes about phishing is more effective than traditional security notification sent to users.
It is noted that human-based approaches to phishing detection have been mainly applied
to e-mail and website environments. (Felt and Wagner 2011) highlight the need to
increase human awareness in emerging communication media such as mobile apps. In
view of the security limitations of the mobile environment, mobile apps lack secure
identity indicators (e.g. certiﬁcate information, lock icons, and cipher selection). Moreover,
mobile apps can be linked by attackers with faked content or spoofed websites, which
further increases the challenge for users to discriminate between fake and valid URLs.
Given the lack of technical solutions to phishing problems on mobile devices, increasing
the awareness of stakeholders becomes even more critical to detecting phishing on those
devices. Similarly, improving user awareness has also been recommended for preventing
voice-based phishing (Griffin and Rackley 2008). Training users to recognize phishing
attacks includes also using PHaaS (Phishing as a Service) techniques in which
organizations simulate real-world phishing scenarios on their users to track susceptibility
to phishing in an experimental-based safe environment (Social Engineer 2017; Meijdam
et al. 2015; Hadnagy 2015). The main objective of these experiments is to understand how
an organization is susceptible to phishing and raise awareness to phishing attacks.
— IQ Test Experiments are usually preceded by providing users with training material about
phishing in specific contexts. These tests are developed from known services that a group
of users employ, while excluding the element of inexperienced services. (Robila and
Ragucci 2006) introduced an IQ-based strategy for spear phishing education. The
proposed technique presents users with both legitimate and phishing emails and ask the
users to classify the emails. In particular, the method helps users to recognize and focus
on important features when receiving suspicious emails. There have been concerns about
the ethical aspects (Jakobsson and Ratkiewicz 2006) and the performance of IQ tests
(Anandpara et al. 2007). No correlation, however, was found between the actual number
of phishing emails and the number of emails indicated as phishing by users who had
taken the IQ test (Anandpara et al. 2007).

5.3.2 Involving users in identifying phishing material

Through participation in identifying legitimate and phishing material users are expected to
be able to manually identify new phishing attempts (Kirda and Kruegel 2006). In addition,
users, particularly expert users, might even participate in creating phishing datasets, which
also contribute to user voting based detection.
— Manual Authentication. This type of approach notifies users to identify suspicious
information about phishing signs. (Dwyer and Duan 2010) present an e-mail path in a
geographical map using information from e-mail headers. The approach makes users
aware of the message path, a scenario in which the e-mail sender claims that the e-mail is
sent from a trusted organization, but the actual IP address might not support such a
claim. User participation in detecting phishing attacks has two major benefits: 1) it is
effective in increasing human security awareness about phishing, and 2) it is useful in
creating phishing datasets through user voting on the suspicious pages.

18

— User Voting. (Phish tank 2015) is the most popular database on reported phishing
websites. The database offers a community based phishing verification system, where
users submit suspected phishes and other users "vote" for whether such submissions are
phishing or legitimate. Similarly, (Liu et al. 2011a) designed a phishing detection
technique by relying on trained participants to vote on suspicious URLs.
Table V: User-based countermeasures and their applied communication media
Type

Increasing user
awareness

User training and
education

IQ tests
Involving users in
the identification of
phishing material

Manual
authentication
User voting

Media: Article
Email: (Kumaraguru et al. 2007a),
(Chandrasekaran et al. 2008),
(Wright and Marett 2010),
Web: (Jakobsson et al. 2007),
(Downs et al. 2007),
(Sheng et al. 2009), (Kumaraguru et
al. 2010)
Mobile: (Felt and Wagner 2011),
(Merwe et al. 2005),
(Niu et al. 2008),
(Canova et al. 2015)
Voice over IP: (Griffin and Rackley
2008)
Web: (Robila and Ragucci 2006),
(Anandpara et al. 2007)
Web: (Dhamija and Tygar 2005)
Email: (Dwyer and Duan 2010)
Web: (Liu et al. 2011)

Table V summarizes user-based approaches to phishing detection. It is shown from the table
that, 1) user education is one of the most commonly used countermeasures to prevent mobile
phishing; 2) user education, training and voting approaches have yet to be explored in
several communication media such as IM and social networks; and 3) user voting could be
cross-listed under the user awareness category.

5.4 Profile matching

Profile matching countermeasures utilize information about the domain name, URLs of
domains recently accessed by users, their credentials in these domains, and other
characteristics of the accessed domains (e.g. layout and images) to create feature based
profiles and use them to detect phishing. The profile matching components can be simple (e.g.
URL matching), or include sophisticated techniques (e.g. image matching). Browser warnings
and most phishing toolbars fall under this category. Several tools are available to manage
user profiles in a decentralized manner (Florêncio and Herley 2006; Lee et al. 2008), and
consolidate their identities (e.g. OpenID, Liberty Alliance's SAML, Microsoft's WS). We
grouped phishing countermeasures that rely on a profile matching strategy into four
categories: Usage History Matching, Pattern Matching, Visual and Structural Matching, and
White- and Black-list Matching.
— Usage History Matching. The user profiles store information about the media and the
user’s authentication used for each media. When such information is requested in a
specific medium claiming to be one of legitimate ones stored in user profile, the antiphishing component uses information stored in the profile to detect the phishing attempt.

19

This type of approach, which has been mainly used to detect phishing in websites, is
composed of two sub-categories. The first category develops browser extension tools to
track user online activities such as his credentials and the webpages he visited (Kirda
and Kruegel 2006; Chandrasekaran et al. 2008). Those tools generate alerts whenever
the user attempts to transmit information in an untrusted path based on historically
tracked information(Wu 2006; Wu et al. 2006b). The second category requires users to
manually create their profiles (Xun et al. 2008), which will in turn be used in phishing
detection.
— Pattern Matching: Instead of recording information about user activities, this type of
approaches creates profiles about other entities (e.g. legitimate webpages, legitimate email patterns). For instance, Spoof Guard browser plug-in (Chou et al. 2004) screens for
pages requesting the user's credentials by checking user browsing history. If the user
enters his stored credentials on an unknown target page, an anomaly score is calculated
through a pattern matching procedure. Based on the score, the page is categorized as
phishing or legitimate. Pattern matching techniques have also been used to detect cloned
profiles in social networks (e.g., (Kontaxis et al. 2011)).
— Visual Matching: visual similarity is computed based on the visual aspects of web
interfaces such as images, blocks, and layout to discriminate between phishing and
legitimate pages. Several approaches introduce visual similarity measures for the
detection of phishing attacks, such as Segmentation-based Visual Similarity (Afroz and
Greenstadt 2011; Bozkir and Sezer 2016), DOM Tree Similarity (Rosiello et al. 2007)
which detects phishing web pages by comparing the legitimate and suspicious pages
based on graph similarity, Earth Mover’s Distance which determines web page similarity
based on images (Fu et al. 2006b), Unicode Character Similarity List (Fu et al. 2006a),
and Contrast Context Histogram Measure which extract key features for pattern
matching at real time (Kuan-Ta et al. 2009). Some visual matching approaches employ
more than one type of similarity measure, such as block-level page similarity, layout and
overall similarity in comparing webpages (Wenyin et al. 2005), text pieces, web page
style, and images embedded in pages (Medvet et al. 2008; Cheng et al. 2011).
— White and Blacklist Matching: This type of countermeasure puts emphasis on creating a
database of known trusted and suspicious domains. Once anomalies are detected using
domain filtering techniques, a matching against a blacklist and/or a whitelist can be
carried out. White- and blacklist matching has been argued to be one of the most effective
approaches to phishing detection (Cao et al. 2008; Chen and Chuanxiong 2006; Kang and
Lee 2007; Ludl et al. 2007). In fact, browser blacklists are the major protection mechanism
against phishing attacks (Tsalis et al. 2015; Virvilis et al. 2014). Google provides the Safe
Browsing service that allows client application to check suspicious URLs against
constantly updated lists of suspicious sites. Based on how blacklists are generated,
(Virvilis et al. 2015) classified existing browsers into three categories:
1. Browsers that utilize the Google Safe Browsing, such as Chrome, Firefox and Safari.
2. Browsers that utilize their own blacklists such as Internet Explorer and Edge that
utilize the SmartScreen − a Microsoft proprietary blacklist.
3. Browsers that aggregate blacklists using third parties’. For instance, Opera utilize
Phishtank and Netcraft blacklists to create its own list of suspicious URLs.
The majority of blacklist approaches were not found to be effective for handling zeroday/hour phishing (Sheng et al. 2009). (Miyamoto et al. 2005) proposed a blacklist filtering
algorithm that can be applied to proxy server with no performance overhead. The idea is
to sanitize the proxy system by blocking all parts of web page content that contains
malicious code including username and password forms. One limitation of this approach is
that it requires efforts to maintain the blacklist. Another lies in performance overhead
incurred when web forms are blocked from the suspicious pages.
20

Table VI summarizes profile matching countermeasures for phishing. Usage history
matching approaches are shown to have been applied not only to spoofed websites, but also to
phishing emails and spoofed user profiles in social networking sites. Nevertheless, the
approaches have been predominantly used for detecting phishing in websites. This
observation may be explained by the availability and accessibility of tools for tracking user’s
online activities. Other types of profile matching approaches have not yet been applied
beyond website spoofing.
Table VI: Profile matching-based countermeasures and their applied communication media
Type

Media: Article

Pattern matching

Web: (Wu et al. 2006b), (Kirda and Kruegel 2006), (Xun et al. 2008),
(Rosiello et al. 2007), E-mail: (Chandrasekaran et al. 2008)
Social networks: (Kontaxis et al. 2011)
Web: (Chou et al. 2004), (Kontaxis et al. 2011)

White and black list
matching

Web: (Miyamoto et al. 2005), (Cao et al. 2008),
(Chen and Chuanxiong 2006), (Kang and Lee 2007), (Ludl et al. 2007)

Visual matching

Web: (Rosiello et al. 2007), (Fu et al. 2005), (Medvet et al. 2008), (Wenyin
et al. 2005), (Kuan-Ta et al. 2009), (Fu et al. 2006b), (Afroz and Greenstadt
2011), (Chen et al. 2010)
Mobile: (Malisa et al. 2016)

Usage history
Matching

5.5 Other Types of Countermeasures

We identified several emerging anti-phishing techniques, including Ontology, Honeypots,
Search Engines, and Client-server Authentication.

5.5.1 Ontology

Ontology models a set of concepts in a particular area as well as the semantic associations
among those concepts (Gruber 1993).
New terms, phrases or expressions used in phishing e-mails can be identified by modeling
them as concepts and semantic relationships in an ontology. Phishing attempts are becoming
sophisticated. In particular the textual content utilized to initialize the attacks are morphed,
making it difficult to classify them using conventional anti-phishing techniques (Taylor et al.
2011). For instance, phishers usually change phishing e-mail contents to avoid the detection
when faced with conventional content-based countermeasures. However, if the semantic
relationships among concepts are properly defined, the likelihood of detecting new forms of
phishing e-mails may increase (Lundquist et al. 2014). Ontological semantics can enhance
natural language understanding by detecting meaning-based clues pointing to phishing and
reasoning about phishing. Very few anti-phishing techniques have incorporated ontology to
date. (Bazarganigilani 2011) proposes an ontology-based approach to improve the accuracy of
classifier-based anti-phishing techniques. The method first extracts features from an e-mail
by analyzing its text, and if the extracted features match those of the known phishing emails, the e-mail is passed to an ontology which then incorporates a set of related concepts in
the detection process. On a related note, (Kerremans et al. 2005) create a knowledge
representation system to differentiate among several types of fraud including phishing.

5.5.2 Honeypots

Honeypots are security devices whose value lies in their being probed and compromised. The
honeypots usually work as a trap that is configured to collect suspicious data. They are
configured to collect data about attackers, create an attacker blacklist databases, and/or
block suspicious domains.
21

Several honeypot-based frameworks have been proposed to counter phishing attacks (Shujun
and Schmitz 2009; Gajek and Sadeghi 2008; McRae and Vaughn 2007).The key idea in such
approaches is to actively provide phishers with honey tokens that seem to be authentication
data (e.g. fingerprinted credentials). Honey tokens can exist in almost any form, from a dead,
faked account to a database entry that would only be selected by malicious queries—any use
of them is inherently suspicious if not necessarily malicious. Another example of a honey
token is a faked email address used to track whether a mailing list has been stolen. Honey
tokens-based approaches can help tracking phishing activities that initiate site shut downs,
and thus become a popular proactive phishing countermeasure (Florêncio and Herley 2006).
(Nassar et al. 2007) propose a holistic honeypot-based approach for Voice over IP security
monitoring. Their approach consists of two key components: a Voice over IP honeypot and a
correlation engine. The main advantage of the proposed technique lies in its ability to defend
against several types of attacks including phishing. HoneyBuddy is yet another approach for
detecting suspicious activities in IM (Antonatos et al. 2010). The method discovers contacts
and includes them in its honeypot messengers by submitting queries to search engines to
identify new contacts and grow its database. Alternatively, it can utilize contact finder sites
to find new potential IM victims. One limitation of honey token approaches lies in their ease
of discovery by phishers. Thus, the major challenge of this type of approach is to extend the
life span of the honey token.

5.5.3 Search Engines

Search engines are combined with other techniques to detect phishing. Typically, if a page is
legitimate, it should have been indexed and assigned a rank by the search engine (Liu et al.
2010).
In contrast, phishing domains are not popular and accordingly their ranks by the search
engine tend to be very low. Even worse, most phishing domains are not indexed by search
engines (Zhang et al. 2007b; Xiang et al. 2011). (Guan et al. 2011) use search engines to
validate the URLS posted on social network pages. A heuristic approach is developed by
analyzing Facebook wall posts that contain URLs. Several features are extracted to
distinguish valid from phishing URLs, such as the dash count in hostname, the existence of
domain name when queried in a search engine, and the age of the domain. (Huh and Kim
2012) propose to use search engine ranking results as inputs to build phishing classifiers, a
technique claimed to be effective in reducing false positives.

5.5.4 Client Server Authentication

Client-server authentication relies on the mutual authentication between clients and servers.
Site Keys, Trusted Devices, Identity-based Signature Scheme, Dynamic Customized Interface,
and Channel ID-based Authentication have been the main authentication techniques used in
detecting and preventing phishing attacks. In Site Keys interactive validation, the user only
needs to perform a single graphic matching to authenticate the images he selected for certain
site (Dhamija and Tygar 2005) (See Appendix I). This approach has advantages in its
simplicity and robustness. Trusted Device (e.g., a smart phone) has been used to perform
mutual authentication (Hart et al. 2011). The approach not only reduces the dependency on
users during the validation process but also has the potential to prevent other types of
attacks such as MITM attacks. Similarly, an Identity-based Signature Scheme has been
utilized to make email communication trustworthy (Adida et al. 2005). Unlike typical digital
signatures, the approach does not require pre-established public-key infrastructure. Neither
does it need collaboration between email domains. Instead, each email domain is
independent and an identity-based controlling authority will issue keys. Additionally, master
public keys corresponding to each domain need to be distributed and certified.
22

Unlike typical key pairs, the identity-based secret keys are calculated by a controlling
authority and then sent to users. Once the keys are sent, a group-based signature scheme is
utilized to allow senders to initiate a signature for a message using a selected signatory
group. This authentication scheme requires the sender to be part of a group and other
members’ public keys to be available. Anyone in the group can confirm that a signature has
been computed with revealing the identity of a signer. Therefore, the sender himself and the
recipients of his message are supposed to be in a single group. Dynamic Customized Interface
is another approach that only asks users to recognize an image generated by the server
instead of any static security indicators shared with the server. Recent works have addressed
the problem of how to securely setup a personalized security indicator in mobile banking
(Marforio et al. 2016). Several authentication techniques utilize the Transport Layer
Security (TLS) and SSL protocols to provide some assurance that the user is the real instead
of a scam website. SSL and TSL are based on public key cryptography (Ying and Xuhua
2006). During the authentication process, the TLS/SSL client sends a message to a TLS/SSL
server. As a result, the server will authenticate itself to the client. Authentication keys are
then exchanged between the server and the client. Once the keys are exchanged and the
validation completed, a secured connection between the client and the server can be
established. Channel ID-based Authentication (Karapanos and Capkun 2014) was designed
to thwart both types of MITM attacks, as introduced in Section 4.3. When the user attempts
to log into his account for the first time from a browser, the web server requires the user to
self-authenticate using a strong second factor authentication device, as in phone
authentication and Universal 2nd Factor (U2F) protocols.
As part of the authentication protocol, the second factor device compares the Channel ID of
the browser to that of the TLS connection that the server witnesses. If they are equal, then
the browser is directly connected to the web server; otherwise, there would be an attack in
the middle, and the device aborts the authentication protocol to stop the attack. A server
may create a channel-bound cookie to protect subsequent interaction with the server from
that browser. There are other categories of authentication mechanisms such as email
authentication. AOL has implemented a mechanism called AOL passcode to avoid phishing
attempts on user accounts (Garera et al. 2007). Passcode utilizes a device that randomly
generates a numeric passcode every minute. Microsoft, on the other hand, implemented
SenderID Filter (Microsoft 2016b), an email authentication protocol, to address the problem
of domain spoofing.
Table VII: Other types of countermeasures and their applied communication media
Type
Ontology
Search engines

Honeypots
Client server
authentication

Media: Publication
E-mail: (Kerremans et al. 2005), (Bazarganigilani 2011)
Web: (Huh and Kim 2012), (Zhang et al. 2007b)
(Xiang and Hong 2009), (Liu et al. 2010)
Social networks:(Guan et al. 2011)
Web: (Shujun and Schmitz 2009), (Gajek and Sadeghi 2008)
IM: (Antonatos et al. 2010), Voice over IP: (Nassar et al. 2007), (Gupta et al.
2015)
Web: (Dhamija and Tygar 2005), (Parno et al. 2006), (Hart et al. 2011)
Email: (Adida et al. 2005), Mobile:(Bicakci et al. 2014)
Mobile: (Marforio et al. 2016)

Table VII summarizes four types of countermeasures within the other categories. Among
them, only search engines-based solutions have been applied to detect phishing in social
networking sites; and ontology to e-mails only.

23

In contrast, honeypot has been used to collect information about phishers in a variety of
media such as IM (e.g., collecting accounts utilized by phishers to send phishing material),
Voice over IP (e.g., creating blacklist databases of suspicious voice sources), and websites.
Client-server authentication countermeasures have been mainly utilized to prevent phishing
in e-mail and website environments.

5.6 Comparison of anti-phishing tools

Phishing research guides the development of new phishing detection and education tools that
can directly benefit target users. (Abbasi et al. 2010) provide a comparison between two types
of anti-phishing tools: the Lookup/blacklist systems and the Classifier/pattern matching
systems. The Lookup Systems include Microsoft IE phishing filter, the Mozilla Firefox
FirePhish, Cloudmark, Earthlink Toolbar, Geotrust Watcher, and the Classifier Systems
include Calling ID, ebay Account Guard, Netcraft, Site Watcher, and Spoof Guard. However,
this comparison schema is limited in that it only focuses on machine learning and statistical
anti-phishing tools. (Shahriar and Zulkernine 2010) compared anti-phishing tools based on
other criteria such as user input it requires, simultaneous testing of several pages, SSL
certificate validation mechanism, supporting languages other than English, and detecting
XSS phishing attempts. The study compared a list of tools, including BogoBiter (Yue and
Wang 2010), (Joshi et al. 2008), AntiPhish (Kirda and Kruegel 2006), DOM anti-Phish
(Rosiello et al. 2007), Cantina (Xiang et al. 2011), SpoofGuard (Chou et al. 2004), PhishTester
(Shahriar and Zulkernine 2010), and the techniques developed by (McRae and Vaughn 2007),
(Wenyin et al. 2006), (Ying and Xuhua 2006), (Xun et al. 2008), (Xiang and Hong 2009),
(Wenyin et al. 2010), and (Ma et al. 2009).
Among the tools, PhishTester, PhishGuard and BogoBiter were ranked highest. This
comparison only focuses on the functions provided by tools but it does not utilize performance
metrics in comparing them. In addition, tools are not compared based on communication
media and attacking techniques. In an effort to understand the state of phishing detection
practice, we provide a side-by-side comparison of anti-phishing tools. In addition to the four
dimensions drawn from our proposed phishing taxonomy, our comparison is also based on
two new dimensions: performance metrics and user evaluation. These dimensions were
identified from our systematic survey of existing studies that involve the evaluation of antiphishing tools. Performance metrics are objective measures, and its most popular examples
include True Positive Rate (TPR), True Negative Rate (TNR), False Positive Rate (FPR), False
Negative Rate (FNR), Accuracy, and Page Load Delay. One concern about the performance of
most of the phishing detection tools is that they are not fast enough (Moore and Clayton 2007,
2008). For instance, the statistics of (McGrath and Gupta 2008) shows that some phishing
domains last for at least 3 days without being discovered by anti-phishing tools. Thus, the
time to take phishing site down is identified as a significant metric for anti-phishing tools
(Yue et al. 2006). Nevertheless, this metric has yet to be used in the evaluation of the
phishing detection techniques. In contrast, user evaluation involves users’ subjective
assessment and perception. Our comparison reveals that only a small number of studies have
conducted user evaluation of anti-phishing tools (see Appendix J.1). In terms of
communication media, spoofed websites predominate in efforts developing anti-phishing
tools. Yet, concerns have been raised about the effectiveness of the tools in detecting web
spoofing attempts (Downs et al. 2006; Egelman et al. 2008; Geer 2005). In contrast, research
tools in support of phishing detection in other types of media such as mobile, IM, and social
networks are still lacking. Despite the fact that several studies have compared phishing
detection techniques (Abbasi et al. 2010; Sheng et al. 2009; Egelman et al. 2008; Li and
Helenius 2007), none has yet to rank them, and consider system usability.

24

Frequency

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

1 1
11

3
2 6 6

9

9

9

8

6

4

4

5 7 9
3

2 1

GeoTrust…
Cloudmark
IE Filter
Sitehound
FirePhish
Earthlink
eBay AG
Google Chrome
spoofGuard
Netcraft
AZ-protect

Higher
Lower
(a) Accuracy

(c) TPR

(b) FPR

Frequency

3
2
1

1
2

0

(e) FNR

(f) BLC and TPRO

Netcraft

(d) TNR

IE Filter

SpoofGu…

Higher

2

1

Lower

(g) Other metrics

Fig. 6 Pairwise comparison results

Using the analytic hierarchy process (AHP), we have provided a ranking of phishing tools
based on the findings of extant comparative studies. Given a set of ; tools and set of binary
comparisons between pairs of tools, AHP infers a total order over the tools by aggregating
the given comparison results. Additionally, our ranking considers both performance and
usability metrics. The former include accuracy, TPR, FPR, TNR, FNR, Black list Coverage
(BLC) and Total Protection (TPRO), and the latter include Visibility of User Interface,
Matching Real World, User Control Freedom, Consistency and Standards, Help Used and
Error Prevention, Flexibility, Aesthetic Design, Pleasurable Interaction, and Privacy. AHP
allows a given pair of tools to receive no comparison due to missing values or to have a tie in
ranking. We identified a set of 32 tools from existing studies. The ranking results of the tools
are reported in Fig. 6, which are sorted in the descending order of the frequency when the
tools are ranked higher in pairwise comparisons. The results show that AZ-protect, Netcraft,
SpoofGuard, Google chrome, eBay AG, and EarthLinks receive the highest ranks in accuracy
(figure 6a) and in FPR (figure 6b); Sitehound and Google Chrome are ranked highest in TPR
(figure 6c); AZ-protect, Net-Craft, and SpoofGuard are the highest in TNR (figure 6d); and
Firephish and eBay AG outperform other tools in FNR (figure 6e). Based on the results of a
small number of studies that used BLC, TPRO, and usability metrics, Google Chrome and
Symantec toolbars are ranked higher than other tools in terms of BLC and TPRO (figure 6f),
and SpoofGuard receives the top rank in usability measures (Figure 6g). The raw ranking
results are reported in appendix J.2. In addition to research tools, we also compared different
commercial tools based on their underlying attack detection/prevention techniques and their
publicly available information(APWG 2014). The results are reported in Appendix K. The
analysis reveals that these tools emphasize detecting and preventing phishing attempts but
have paid insufficient attention to security awareness and training. Instead, the majority of
the tools provide algorithmic solutions to prevent phishing such as cousin domains (e.g.,
cyber-security.com spoofs an actual domain cybersecurity.com and sends emails from the
spoofed domain). Additionally, existing commercial tools do not yet have functions to cope
with phishing attacks in emerging media such as social networks. There is also limited
commercialization of ontology and search engines based countermeasures. To this end, we
have identified the following open research issues that are worthy of exploration in future.
25

These issues along with their potential countermeasures are also summarized in table VIII.
— Zero-day Phishing Detection: Since phishers are constantly adapting their phishing tactics
and users would most likely be deceived by unknown phishing attempts, detecting those
attempts is very significant to avoid possible financial losses. There is some pioneering
work on addressing zero-day phishing (Zhan and Thomas 2011; Moghimi and Varjani
2016). Nevertheless, one of the approaches that have been overlooked is contextual
similarity with known phishing patterns. Unknown phishing attempts share some
common contextual relationships with known ones despite the former’s unique
characteristics. Thus, contextual similarity can be used in the prediction of unknown
patterns of phishing by projecting future possible activities of an adversary and the paths
he/she may take. Another promising path for detecting unknown phishing attempts is to
combine anomaly detection with contextual similarity. Several anomaly detection
approaches can be used in this combination approach such as anomaly-based one class
classification approaches that have been recently used in detecting zero-day intrusions
(Shon and Moon 2007).
— Multi-stage Phishing Detection: Multi-stage attacks are initialized in one communication
media and accomplished in another. Thus, it becomes necessary to implement new
phishing solutions that trace and detect phishing attempts at all stages. For instance,
when phishing attempts are initiated by e-mails which redirect users to spoofed webpages,
appropriate tools are needed to examine phishing patterns in both types of media
simultaneously. Co-clustering is one of the clustering approaches that has been used to
classify two types of objects simultaneously (Bühler and Hein 2009; Long et al. 2007; Lei
et al. 2012). When applied in phishing detection, co-clustering can be used to create bipartition graphs by simultaneously clustering similar patterns in phishing e-mail and the
corresponding website contents referred to by e-mail URLs.
— Deceptive Voice Phishing Detection: Voice phishing detection has received limited
attention in phishing research to date. To this end, several machine learning techniques
such as wavelet clustering have great potential (Sheikholeslami et al. 1998; El-Wakdy et
al. 2008). Wavelet clustering relies on clustering voice waves for speech recognition. Since
it is an unsupervised technique, wavelet clustering might be used in detecting unknown
patterns of voice phishing attempts. In addition, honeypots can be used to collect
suspicious phone numbers to create blacklists (Nassar et al. 2007). Future research
approaches need to focus on creating voice-based classification techniques through
analyzing patterns of suspicious voices collected by honeypots (Hirschberg et al. 2005).
Further, there is a trend of detecting voice phishing in mobile environment.
— Phishing Detection in an Adaptive Environment: Adaptive environment is defined as those
which are strategically or tactically modified according to their usage (e.g. websites,
mobile apps). Existing anti-phishing techniques could lead to high false positive rate when
applied in such an environment since most of them are rule-based (R. Basnet et al. 2011;
Ludl et al. 2007; Aburrous et al. 2008). Additionally, they recognize minor changes in
these media as phishing attempts. To resolve this problem adaptive classifiers can be
utilized (Taninpong and Ngamsuriyaroj 2009). In addition, as the structure of a web site
changes, an ontology consisting of concepts of that particular website can handle the site
topology construction and restructuring (Raufi et al. 2009). Specifically, the site ontology
can be utilized in mapping between the structure of the site under checking and the
stored ontology. Then, based on similarity in terms of structure and content between the
site examined and the legitimate site ontology, the website can be classified using
appropriate classification functions.

26

— Detecting Phishing farms using Ranking-based Phishing Detection: Ranking based
countermeasures can be used in the detection of not only single-page phishing but
phishing farms that utilize similar domain names and features as well (Youn and McLeod
2009). Despite the demonstrated effectiveness of search engines in detecting phishing
(Sunil and Sardana 2012), the validation environment is external and thus inefficient.
Specifically, a detection application has to submit suspicious URLs to a search engine,
evaluate search results, and pass the results back to the phishing detection engine.
Additionally, the robots used to check URLs posted to search engines are usually
recognized as spamming attempts by search engines. To address these issues, creating an
internal ranking-based mechanism is a promising direction for phishing detection.
— Multilingual Phishing Detection: Monolingual phishing attacks in English have increased
over time. There have also been some phishing attempts on PayPal accomplished in two
languages (English and French) simultaneously (Smustaca 2011). According to RSA
Security’s Anti-Fraud Command Center (AFCC), there is an increase in the rate of
phishing attacks which target commercial sites in non-English speaking countries.
According to a security report (Sullivan et al. 2014), depending on the countries involved,
addressing fraud threats means in many cases differences between languages. Those
differences complicate the task of researchers and practitioners who would otherwise take
advantage of many anti-phishing tools developed for other languages. Several text mining
techniques, as introduced in Section 5.2, can be used to create new anti-phishing
mechanisms. Multilingual IR is one of the new research areas that focus on creating
language-independent IR models. Several other types of semantics-based techniques such
as ontology, LSA and semantic networks (Wenyin et al. 2010) have shown success in
various applications, which might be extended to phishing detection in different
languages.
— Detection of Profile Cloning Attacks: One of the many problems inherent in social
networking websites is profile cloning. In such attacks, fake user profiles are created as
duplicates of an authentic user on the same or across different social networks. The main
objective of the cloning attacker is to mislead the user’s friends into forming bogus
relationships with the faked profile (Lee et al. 2010). The attacker can exploit this trust to
collect personal information on the user’s friends and perform various types of online
frauds. Aside from the manual approach to detect profile cloning by calling every person
who sends the message to identify their identities, some social networking sites, such as
Facebook, have been trying out social authentication methods. Nevertheless, such
methods can be easily breached; as attackers often know a lot about their targets and the
user's personal social knowledge is generally shared with people in their social circle (Huh
and Kim 2012). Additionally, photo-based social authentication methods are increasingly
vulnerable to automatic attacks such as face recognition and social tagging technologies.
To this end, Profile Trust Models are a promising solution, which work by evaluating the
material received by users (Wang et al. 2010; Chou et al. 2004). For instance, the sender’s
profile can be validated based on the number of friends, social networks usage history, the
number of followers, and so on.
— Context-based Interactive Phishing Prevention: The design of traditional security training
solutions to avoiding security attacks mostly does not take into account contextual factors
about users (Wilson and Hash 2003). Moreover, most users do not pay attentions to
warning signs about phishing in their context (Kumaraguru et al. 2007a). Therefore, it
has significant practical implications to develop context-aware and interactive phishing
detection and prevention solutions. User context includes not only factors directly related
to users, but characteristics of communication media and phishing targets as well.

27

Depending on the types of context, different techniques can be employed. For instance, to
identify phishing target communities, some studies are required to identify target social
contexts and the phishing patterns utilized to target different types of institutions
(Weaver and Collins 2007). Social Network Analysis and Graph Mining techniques can
also be used to group users who have responded to phishing URLs on social networks,
news groups, and blogs based on their context (Liu et al. 2011). The objective of all such
techniques is to design context-based security awareness solutions.
Table VIII: Future Research Issues in Phishing Detection

Detection of Profile Cloning Attacks
Multi-stage phishing detection
Context-based phishing detection
and prevention
Phishing in adaptive environments
Detecting Phishing farms

Ranking-based phishing detection

Deceptive voice phishing, Profile
cloning

Blacklist collector

Text
Mining
Profile
Matching
Human
User
Ontology
Search
Engine
Honeypot

√ √
√ √

√

√ √
√

√
√
√

√ √

√

√ √
√ √
√ √
√
√ √

√

√

S

Graph mining techniques
Latent Semantic Analysis and
Semantic nets
Profile trust models
Multi-layer profiles
Interactive training and Social
Network Analysis
Structure and content mapping

Multilingual phishing

Machine
Learning

V

Zero-day phishing
Multi-stage phishing detection
Deceptive voice phishing
Phishing in adaptive environments
Context-based phishing detection
and prevention

√

M

Contextual relationships with known
phishing patterns
One class-anomaly detection
Co-clustering
Wavelet clustering
Adaptive classifiers

Media*
E

Zero-day phishing

Countermeasure
Category

IM

Suggested Countermeasure

W

Issue

√
√

√
√
√
√
√

√

√ √
√
√

√ √ √ √

*W: Web, E:Email , M:Mobile, IM: Instant Messenger, V: Voice, S: Social Networks

6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This research creates a multidimensional phishing taxonomy based on a comprehensive
survey of the related literature. The taxonomy provides an integrated view of phishing that
consists of four dimensions: communication media, target environments, attacking
techniques, and countermeasures. This research not only identifies traditional and emerging
communication channels where phishing attacks take place, but also uses the
communication media as lens to analyze phishing countermeasures. Moreover, the research
fills a gap in the study of phishing countermeasures through a systematic study by providing
a classification consisting of five categories, namely machine learning, text mining, human
users, profile matching, and others, and the last category further consists of search engines,
ontology, client-server authentication, and honeypot countermeasures. Among them, the first
three are most widely studied, whereas semantics-based techniques in the other category
such as ontology has been overlooked. This study also reveals that anti-phishing research
and development has focused on phishing in e-mails and websites, but paid little attention to
that in IM, social networks, voice, blogs and web forums; further, phishing in mobile
communication has yet to be explored from the technical perspective. In addition, the
proposed taxonomy identifies emerging attack vectors such as vishing, spear phishing, fake
e-card, online job-hunting and donation scams, mobile apps and online social networks.

28

These findings lend themselves to a number of open issues for future research and
development in phishing detection and prevention of techniques such as zero-day phishing.
Going beyond issue identification, we suggest promising solutions based on the proposed
categorization of countermeasures.
References
Aaron, G., & Rasmussen, R. (2013). Global Phishing survey: trends and domain name use in 2H2013.
http://docs.apwg.org/reports/APWG_GlobalPhishingSurvey_2H2013.pdf.
Abad, C. (2005). The economy of phishing: A survey of the operations of the phishing market. First Monday, 10(9).
Abawajy, J. (2014). User preference of cyber security awareness delivery methods. Behaviour & Information Technology, 33(3), 237248.
Abbasi, A., Zhang, Z., Zimbra, D., Chen, H., & Nunamaker Jr, J. F. (2010). Detecting fake websites: the contribution of statistical
learning theory. Mis Quarterly, 435-461.
Abu-Nimeh, S., Nappa, D., Wang, X., & Nair, S. A comparison of machine learning techniques for phishing detection. In
Proceedings of the anti-phishing working groups 2nd annual eCrime researchers summit, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 2007
(pp. 60-69). 1299021: ACM. doi:10.1145/1299015.1299021.
Aburrous, M., Hossain, M. A., Thabatah, F., & Dahal, K. Intelligent phishing website detection system using fuzzy techniques. In
ICTTA 2008. 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies: From Theory to
Applications, 2008 (pp. 1-6): IEEE
Adida, B., Hohenberger, S., & Rivest, R. L. (2005). Fighting phishing attacks: A lightweight trust architecture for detecting spoofed
emails. DIMACS Wkshp on Theft in E-Commerce, April 2005.
Afroz, S., & Greenstadt, R. PhishZoo: Detecting Phishing Websites by Looking at Them. In Semantic Computing (ICSC), 2011 Fifth
IEEE International Conference on, Palo Alto, CA 18-21 Sept. 2011 2011 (pp. 368-375)
Aggarwal, A., Rajadesingan, A., & Kumaraguru, P. PhishAri: Automatic realtime phishing detection on twitter. In eCrime
Researchers Summit (eCrime), 2012 (pp. 1-12): IEEE
Almomani, A., Gupta, B., Atawneh, S., Meulenberg, A., & Almomani, E. (2013). A survey of phishing email filtering techniques.
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 15(4), 2070-2090.
Alsaid, A., & Mitchell, C. J. Preventing phishing attacks using trusted computing technology. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Network Conference (INC’06), 2006 (pp. 221-228)
Anandpara, V., Dingman, A., Jakobsson, M., Liu, D., & Roinestad, H. (2007). Phishing IQ tests measure fear, not ability. In
Financial Cryptography and Data Security (pp. 362-366): Springer.
Andre, B., Gerhard, P., Luigi, D., & Domenico, D. (2010). A Real-Life Study in Phishing Detection. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of the Conference on Email and Anti-Spam (CEAS), Redmond, Washington,
André, B., Gerhard, P., Luigi, D. A., & Domenico, D. A real-life study in phishing detection. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Email and Anti-Spam (CEAS), 2010 (Vol. 1, pp. 1-10)
Antonatos, S., Polakis, I., Petsas, T., & Markatos, E. P. A systematic characterization of im threats using honeypots. In Proceedings
of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium(NDSS), San Diego, California, USA, 2010
APWG (2014). APWG Phishing Solutions Directory. http://docs.apwg.org/solutions.html#cousin.
Arachchilage, N. A. G., Love, S., & Beznosov, K. (2016). Phishing threat avoidance behaviour: An empirical investigation.
Computers in human behavior, 60, 185-197.
Aycock, J. A design for an anti-spear-phishing system. In 7th Virus Bulletin International Conference, Vienna, Austria, 2007 (pp.
290-293): Citeseer
Banerjee, A., & Faloutsos, M. (2013). Automated identification of phishing, phony and malicious web sites. Google Patents.
Bartoli, A., Davanzo, G., De Lorenzo, A., Medvet, E., & Sorio, E. (2014). Automatic synthesis of regular expressions from examples.
Computer(12), 72-80.
Baset, M. (2017) QRLJacking Attack. [Online] available: https://github.com/OWASP/QRLJacking/wiki/QRLJacking-Attack.
Basnet, R., Sung, A., & Liu, Q. Rule-based phishing attack detection. In International Conference on Security and Management
(SAM 2011), Las Vegas, NV, 2011
Basnet, R. B., Sung, A. H., & Liu, Q. Rule-based phishing attack detection. In International Conference on Security and Management
(SAM 2011), Las Vegas, NV, 2011
Bazarganigilani, M. (2011). Phishing E-Mail Detection Using Ontology Concept and Naïve Bayes Algorithm. International Journal of
Research and Reviews in Computer Science, 2(2), 249-252.
Berghel, H., Carpinter, J., & Jo, Y. (2007). Phish phactors: Offensive and defensive strategies. Advances in Computers, 70, 223-268.
Bergholz, A., Chang, J. H., Paass, G., Reichartz, F., & Strobel, S. Improved Phishing Detection using Model-Based Features. In
CEAS, 2008
Berry, M. W., & Castellanos, M. (2004). Survey of text mining. Computing Reviews, 45(9), 548.
Bhakta, R., & Harris, I. G. Semantic analysis of dialogs to detect social engineering attacks. In IEEE International Conference on
Semantic Computing (ICSC) 2015 (pp. 424-427): IEEE
Bicakci, K., Unal, D., Ascioglu, N., & Adalier, O. Mobile authentication secure against man-in-the-middle attacks. In 2nd IEEE
International Conference on Mobile Cloud Computing, Services, and Engineering (MobileCloud), 2014 (pp. 273-276):
IEEE
Blatz, J. (2007). CSRF: Attack and Defense. McAfee Foundstone Professional Services, White Paper.
Blythe, M., Petrie, H., & Clark, J. A. F for fake: four studies on how we fall for phish. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2011 (pp. 3469-3478): ACM

29

Borsack, R., & Lifson, M. (2010). The Truth about Social Media Identity Theft: Perception versus Reality.
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20100621005370/en/Truth-Social-Media-Identity-Theft-Perception-Reality.
Bose, I., & Leung, A. C. M. (2008). Assessing anti-phishing preparedness: A study of online banks in Hong Kong. Decision Support
Systems, 45(4), 897-912.
Bozkir, A. S., & Sezer, E. A. Use of HOG descriptors in phishing detection. In 4th International Symposium on Digital Forensic and
Security (ISDFS), 2016 (pp. 148-153): IEEE
Braun, B., Koestler, J., Posegga, J., & Johns, M. (2014). A Trusted UI for the Mobile Web. In ICT Systems Security and Privacy
Protection (pp. 127-141): Springer.
Bühler, T., & Hein, M. Spectral clustering based on the graph p-Laplacian. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2009 (pp. 81-88): ACM
Bulakh, V., & Gupta, M. (2016). Countering Phishing from Brands' Vantage Point. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2016
ACM on International Workshop on Security And Privacy Analytics, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA,
Canova, G., Volkamer, M., Bergmann, C., Borza, R., Reinheimer, B., Stockhardt, S., et al. (2015). Learn to Spot Phishing URLs with
the Android NoPhish App. In Information Security Education Across the Curriculum (pp. 87-100): Springer.
Cao, Y., Han, W., & Le, Y. Anti-phishing based on automated individual white-list. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on
Digital identity management, 2008 (pp. 51-60): ACM
Caputo, D. D., Pfleeger, S. L., Freeman, J. D., & Johnson, M. E. (2014). Going Spear Phishing: Exploring Embedded Training and
Awareness. IEEE Security & Privacy, 12(1), 28-38.
Carlson, E. L. (2006). Phishing for elderly victims: as the elderly migrate to the Internet fraudulent schemes targeting them follow.
Elder LJ, 14, 423.
Chandola, V., Banerjee, A., & Kumar, V. (2009). Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 41(3), 15.
Chandrasekaran, M., Narayanan, K., & Upadhyaya, S. Phishing email detection based on structural properties. In NYS Cyber Security
Conference, Albany, New York, 2006 (pp. 1-7)
Chandrasekaran, M., Sankaranarayanan, V., & Upadhyaya, S. CUSP: customizable and usable spam filters for detecting phishing
emails. In 3rd Annual Symposium on Information Assurance (ASIA’08), Albany, NY., 2008 (pp. 10): Citeseer
Chang, J.-H., & Lee, K.-H. (2010). Voice phishing detection technique based on minimum classification error method incorporating
codec parameters. Signal Processing, IET, 4(5), 502-509.
Chang, J., & Lee, K. (2010). Voice phishing detection technique based on minimum classification error method incorporating codec
parameters. Signal Processing, IET, 4(5), 502-509, doi:10.1049/iet-spr.2009.0066.
Chen, C.-M., Guan, D., & Su, Q.-K. (2014). Feature set identification for detecting suspicious URLs using Bayesian classification in
social networks. Information Sciences, 289, 133-147.
Chen, C., Dick, S., & Miller, J. (2010). Detecting visually similar web pages: Application to phishing detection. ACM Transactions on
Internet Technology (TOIT), 10(2), 5.
Chen, J., & Chuanxiong, G. Online detection and prevention of phishing attacks. In 2006 First International Conference on
Communications and Networking in China, 2006 (pp. 1-7): IEEE
Cheng, H., Wang, P., & Pu, S. Identify fixed-path phishing attack by STC. In Proceedings of the 8th Annual Collaboration,
Electronic messaging, Anti-Abuse and Spam Conference, 2011 (pp. 172-175): ACM
Chhabra, S., Aggarwal, A., Benevenuto, F., & Kumaraguru, P. Phi. sh/$ oCiaL: the phishing landscape through short URLs. In the
8th Annual Collaboration, Electronic messaging, Anti-Abuse and Spam Conference, Perth, Western Australia, 2011 (pp.
92-101): ACM
Choi, H., Zhu, B. B., & Lee, H. (2011). Detecting malicious web links and identifying their attack types. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of the 2nd USENIX conference on Web application development, Portland,
Chou, N., Ledesma, R., Teraguchi, Y., Boneh, D., & Mitchell, J. C. Client-side defense against web-based identity theft. In 11th
Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS’04), San Diego, California, 2004: San Diego, USA
Chu, Z., Gianvecchio, S., Wang, H., & Jajodia, S. Who is tweeting on Twitter: human, bot, or cyborg? In Proceedings of the 26th
annual computer security applications conference, Austin, TX, USA, 2010 (pp. 21-30): ACM
Chuan, Y., & Haining, W. (2010). BogusBiter: A transparent protection against phishing attacks. ACM Transactions on Internet
Technology (TOIT), 10(2), 6.
Cova, M., Kruegel, C., & Vigna, G. (2008). There Is No Free Phish: An Analysis of" Free" and Live Phishing Kits. WOOT, 8, 1-8.
Dhamija, R., & Tygar, J. D. (2005). The battle against phishing: Dynamic Security Skins. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the
2005 symposium on Usable privacy and security, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
Dhamija, R., Tygar, J. D., & Hearst, M. Why phishing works. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in
computing systems, 2006 (pp. 581-590): ACM
Ding, Y., Meng, X., Chai, G. and Tang, Y. (2011). November. User identification for instant messages. In International Conference
on Neural Information Processing (pp. 113-120). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Dodge, R. C., Carver, C., & Ferguson, A. J. (2007). Phishing for user security awareness. Computers & Security, 26(1), 73-80.
Downs, J. S., Holbrook, M., & Cranor, L. F. Behavioral response to phishing risk. In Proceedings of the anti-phishing working
groups 2nd annual eCrime researchers summit, Pittsburgh, PA, 2007 (pp. 37-44): ACM
Downs, J. S., Holbrook, M. B., & Cranor, L. F. Decision strategies and susceptibility to phishing. In Proceedings of the second
symposium on Usable privacy and security, 2006 (pp. 79-90): ACM
Drake, C. E., Oliver, J. J., & Koontz, E. J. Anatomy of a phishing email. In Pro-ceedings of CEAS the First Conference on Email
and Anti-Spam (CEAS), Mountain View, CA, 2004 (Vol. 11)
Dunlop, M., Groat, S., & Shelly, D. Goldphish: Using images for content-based phishing analysis. In Fifth International Conference
on Internet Monitoring and Protection (ICIMP), 2010 (pp. 123-128): IEEE
Dwyer, P., & Duan, Z. MDMap: Assisting Users in Identifying Phishing Emails. In Proceedings of 7th Annual Collaboration,
Electronic Messaging, Anti-Abuse and Spam Conference (CEAS), Redmond, Washington, 2010
Egele, M., Stringhini, G., Kruegel, C., & Vigna, G. COMPA: Detecting Compromised Accounts on Social Networks. In NDSS, 2013

30

Egelman, S., Cranor, L. F., & Hong, J. You've been warned: an empirical study of the effectiveness of web browser phishing
warnings. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2008 (pp. 1065-1074):
ACM
El-Wakdy, M., El-Sehely, E., El-Tokhy, M., & El-Hennawy, A. (2008). Speech recognition using a wavelet transform to establish
fuzzy inference system through subtractive clustering and neural network (ANFIS). Paper presented at the Proceedings of
the 12th WSEAS international conference on Systems, Heraklion, Greece,
Emigh, A. (2005). Online Identity Theft: Phishing Technology, Chokepoints and Countermeasures. Washington, DC : Identity Theft
Technology Council.
FBI (2010). Smishing and Vishing, Federal Bureau of Investigation.
https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/2010/november/cyber_112410/cyber_112410.
Felegyhazi, M., Kreibich, C., & Paxson, V. (2010). On the Potential of Proactive Domain Blacklisting. LEET, 10, 6-6.
Felt, A. P., & Wagner, D. Phishing on mobile devices. In Web 2.0 Security and Privacy Workshop, Oakland, California, 2011
Felten, E. W., Balfanz, D., Dean, D., & Wallach, D. S. Web spoofing: An internet con game. In Proceedings of NISSC ’97. (1997),
Baltimore Maryland, 1997 (Vol. 28, pp. 6-8, Vol. 2)
Ferrara, J. (2013). Social Engineering and How to Counteract Advanced Attacks.
http://pittsburgh.issa.org/Social%20Engineering%20ISSA_May%202013_Final.pdf.
Fette, I., Sadeh, N., & Tomasic, A. Learning to detect phishing emails. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World
Wide Web, 2007 (pp. 649-656): ACM
Florêncio, D., & Herley, C. (2006). Password rescue: a new approach to phishing prevention. Paper presented at the Proceedings of
the 1st USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Security, Vancouver, B.C., Canada,
Fu, A. Y., Deng, X., & Liu, W. A potential IRI based phishing strategy. In International Conference on Web Information Systems
Engineering, 2005 (pp. 618-619): Springer
Fu, A. Y., Deng, X., & Wenyin, L. (2006a). REGAP: A Tool for Unicode-Based Web Identity Fraud Detection. Journal of Digital
Forensic Practice, 1(2), 83-97.
Fu, A. Y., Wenyin, L., & Deng, X. (2006b). Detecting phishing web pages with visual similarity assessment based on earth mover's
distance (EMD). IEEE transactions on dependable and secure computing, 3(4), 301-311.
Gajek, S., & Sadeghi, A.-R. (2008). A Forensic Framework for Tracing Phishers
The Future of Identity in the Information Society. In S. Fischer-Hübner, P. Duquenoy, A. Zuccato, & L. Martucci (Eds.), (Vol. 262,
pp. 23-35, IFIP International Federation for Information Processing): Springer Boston.
Gansterer, W. N., & Pölz, D. (2009). E-mail classification for phishing defense. In Advances in Information Retrieval (pp. 449-460):
Springer.
Garera, S., Provos, N., Chew, M., & Rubin, A. D. A framework for detection and measurement of phishing attacks. In Proceedings of
the ACM workshop on Recurring malcode, VA, USA 2007 (pp. 1-8): ACM
Gastellier-Prevost, S., Granadillo, G. G., & Laurent, M. Decisive heuristics to differentiate legitimate from phishing sites. In Network
and Information Systems Security Conference (SAR-SSI), 2011 (pp. 1-9): IEEE
Geer, D. (2005). Security technologies go phishing. Computer, 38(6), 18-21.
Goel, N., Raman, B., & Gupta, I. (2014). Mobile Worms and Viruses. Information Security in Diverse Computing Environments. In
Advances in Information Security, Privacy, and Ethics (AISPE) IGI Global.
Gouda, M. G., Liu, A. X., Leung, L. M., & Alam, M. A. (2007). SPP: An anti-phishing single password protocol. Computer Networks,
51(13), 3715-3726.
Guo, D., Cao, J., Wang, X., Fu, Q. and Li, Q. (2016). Combating QR-Code-Based Compromised Accounts in Mobile Social
Networks. Sensors, 16(9), p.1522.
Griffin, S. E., & Rackley, C. C. Vishing. In Proceedings of the 5th annual conference on Information security curriculum
development, Kennesaw, GA, USA, 2008 (pp. 33-35): ACM
Gruber, T. R. (1993). A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. Knowledge acquisition, 5(2), 199-220.
Guan, D., Chen, C. M., & Lin, J. B. Anomaly based malicious URL detection in instant messaging. In In Proceedings of the Joint
Workshop on Information Security (JWIS), Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 2009
Guan, D., Chen, C. M., Su, Q. K., & Wang, T. Y. (2011). Malicious URL Detection on Facebook. Paper presented at the The 6th Joint
Workshop on Information Security, Kaohsiung, Taiwan,
Gupta, P., Srinivasan, B., Balasubramaniyan, V., & Ahamad, M. Phoneypot: Data-driven Understanding of Telephony Threats. In
NDSS, 2015
Gyawali, B., Solorio, T., Montes-y-Gómez, M., Wardman, B., & Warner, G. Evaluating a semisupervised approach to phishing URL
identification in a realistic scenario. In Proceedings of the 8th Annual Collaboration, Electronic messaging, Anti-Abuse
and Spam Conference, 2011 (pp. 176-183): ACM
Hadnagy, C.J. (2015). Phishing-as-a-Service (PHaas) Used To Increase Corporate Security Awareness. U.S. Patent Application
14/704,148.
Hart, M., Castille, C., Harpalani, M., Toohill, J., & Johnson, R. PhorceField: a phish-proof password ceremony. In Proceedings of the
27th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, 2011 (pp. 159-168): ACM
Herley, C., & Florêncio, D. A profitless endeavor: phishing as tragedy of the commons. In Proceedings of the 2008 workshop on New
security paradigms, Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, 2009 (pp. 59-70): ACM
Herzberg, A., & Jbara, A. (2008). Security and identification indicators for browsers against spoofing and phishing attacks. ACM
Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), 8(4), 16.
Herzberg, A., & Margulies, R. (2011). Forcing Johnny to login safely. In Computer Security–ESORICS 2011 (pp. 452-471): Springer.
Hirschberg, J., Benus, S., Brenier, J. M., Enos, F., Friedman, S., Gilman, S., et al. Distinguishing deceptive from non-deceptive
speech. In INTERSPEECH, 2005 (pp. 1833-1836)
Hong, J. (2012). The state of phishing attacks. Communications of the ACM, 55(1), 74-81.
Hsu, C.-H., Huang, C.-Y., & Chen, K.-T. Fast-flux bot detection in real time. In Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, 2010 (pp.
464-483): Springer

31

Huajun, H., Junshan, T., & Lingxi, L. Countermeasure Techniques for Deceptive Phishing Attack. In NISS '09. International
Conference on New Trends in Information and Service Science, Gyeongju, Korea, 2009 (pp. 636-641): IEEE.
doi:10.1109/niss.2009.80.
Huber, M., Kowalski, S., Nohlberg, M., & Tjoa, S. Towards automating social engineering using social networking sites. In
International Conference on Computational Science and Engineering, 2009 (Vol. 3, pp. 117-124): IEEE
Huh, J., & Kim, H. (2012). Phishing Detection with Popular Search Engines: Simple and Effective. Foundations and Practice of
Security, 6888, 194-207, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-27901-0_15.
Hulten, G. J., Rehfuss, P. S., Rounthwaite, R., Goodman, J. T., Seshadrinathan, G., & Penta, A. P. (2014). Finding phishing sites.
Google Patents.
Infosec-Institute (2015). Spear-phishing statistics from 2014-2015. http://resources.infosecinstitute.com/spear-phishing-statisticsfrom-2014-2015/.
Inomata, A., Rahman, S. M. M., Okamoto, T., & Okamoto, E. A novel mail filtering method against phishing. In IEEE Pacific Rim
Conference on Communications, Computers and signal Processing(PACRIM. 2005), Victoria, B.C., Canada, 2005 (pp.
221-224): IEEE
Irani, D., Balduzzi, M., Balzarotti, D., Kirda, E., & Pu, C. Reverse social engineering attacks in online social networks. In
Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Detection of intrusions and malware, and vulnerability assessment,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2011 (pp. 55-74). 2026653: Springer-Verlag
Irani, D., Webb, S., Giffin, J., & Pu, C. Evolutionary study of phishing. In eCrime Researchers Summit, 2008, Cambridge, MA, USA,
2008 (pp. 1-10): IEEE
Jagatic, T. N., Johnson, N. A., Jakobsson, M., & Menczer, F. (2007). Social phishing. Communications of the ACM, 50(10), 94-100.
Jain, A. K., Murty, M. N., & Flynn, P. J. (1999). Data clustering: a review. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 31(3), 264-323.
Jakobsson, M., & Myers, S. (2006). Phishing and countermeasures: understanding the increasing problem of electronic identity theft:
John Wiley & Sons.
Jakobsson, M., & Ratkiewicz, J. Designing ethical phishing experiments: a study of (ROT13) rOnl query features. In Proceedings of
the 15th international conference on World Wide Web, Edinburgh, Scotland Uk, 2006 (pp. 513-522): ACM
Jakobsson, M., & Soghoian, C. (2009). Social Engineering in Phishing. Information Assurance, Security and Privacy Services, 4, 195.
Jakobsson, M., Tsow, A., Shah, A., Blevis, E., & Lim, Y.-K. (2007). What instills trust? a qualitative study of phishing. In Financial
Cryptography and Data Security (pp. 356-361): Springer.
Joshi, Y., Saklikar, S., Das, D., & Saha, S. PhishGuard: a browser plug-in for protection from phishing. In 2nd International
Conference on Internet Multimedia Services Architecture and Applications, 2008 (pp. 1-6): IEEE
Jung, C., & Lee, K. (2010). Voice phishing detection technique based on minimum classification error method incorporating codec
parameters. Signal Processing, IET, 4(5), 502-509, doi:10.1049/iet-spr.2009.0066.
Kang, J., & Lee, D. Advanced white list approach for preventing access to phishing sites. In Convergence Information Technology,
2007. International Conference on, 2007 (pp. 491-496): IEEE
Karapanos, N., & Capkun, S. On the effective prevention of TLS man-in-the-middle attacks in web applications. In 23rd USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 14), 2014 (pp. 671-686)
Kerremans, K., Yan, T., Temmerman, R., & Gang, Z. Towards Ontology-based E-mail Fraud Detection. In portuguese conference on
Artificial intelligence, 2005. epia 2005. , Covilhã, Portugal, 5-8 Dec. 2005 2005 (pp. 106-111)
Kessem, L. (2012). Rogue Mobile Apps, Phishing, Malware and Fraud. https://blogs.rsa.com/rogue-mobile-apps-phishing-malwareand-fraud/.
Khonji, M., Jones, A., & Iraqi, Y. A study of feature subset evaluators and feature subset searching methods for phishing
classification. In Proceedings of the 8th Annual Collaboration, Electronic messaging, Anti-Abuse and Spam Conference,
2011 (pp. 135-144): ACM
Kirda, E., & Kruegel, C. (2006). Protecting users against phishing attacks. The Computer Journal, 49(5), 554-561.
Klien, F., & Strohmaier, M. Short links under attack: geographical analysis of spam in a URL shortener network. In Proceedings of
the 23rd ACM conference on Hypertext and social media, 2012 (pp. 83-88): ACM
Kontaxis, G., Polakis, I., Ioannidis, S., & Markatos, E. P. Detecting social network profile cloning. In 2011 IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PERCOM Workshops),, seattle, USA, 21-25 March
2011 2011 (pp. 295-300)
Krammer, V. Phishing defense against IDN address spoofing attacks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Privacy,
Security and Trust: Bridge the Gap Between PST Technologies and Business Services, 2006 (pp. 32): ACM
Krombholz, K., Hobel, H., Huber, M., & Weippl, E. (2015). Advanced social engineering attacks. Journal of Information Security and
applications, 22, 113-122.
Kuan-Ta, C., Jau-Yuan, C., Chun-Rong, H., & Chu-Song, C. (2009). Fighting Phishing with Discriminative Keypoint Features.
Internet Computing, IEEE, 13(3), 56-63.
Kumar, A. (2005). Phishing-A new age weapon. Technical report, Open Web Application Secuirtry Project (OWASP).
Kumaraguru, P., Rhee, Y., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L. F., Hong, J., & Nunge, E. Protecting people from phishing: the design and
evaluation of an embedded training email system. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, San Jose, CA, USA, 2007a (pp. 905-914): ACM
Kumaraguru, P., Rhee, Y., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L. F., Hong, J., & Nunge, E. (2007b). Protecting people from phishing: the design
and evaluation of an embedded training email system. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems, San Jose, California, USA,
Kumaraguru, P., Sheng, S., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L. F., & Hong, J. (2010). Teaching Johnny not to fall for phish. ACM Transactions
on Internet Technology (TOIT), 10(2), 7.
L'Huillier, G., Hevia, A., Weber, R., & Rios, S. Latent semantic analysis and keyword extraction for phishing classification. In
Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 2010 IEEE International Conference on, Vancouver, BC, Canada 23-26 May
2010 2010 (pp. 129-131)

32

L'Huillier, G., Weber, R., & Figueroa, N. Online phishing classification using adversarial data mining and signaling games. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on CyberSecurity and Intelligence Informatics, 2009 (pp. 33-42): ACM
Le, A., Markopoulou, A., & Faloutsos, M. Phishdef: URL Names Say It All. In INFOCOM, 2011 Proceedings IEEE, 2011 (pp. 191195): IEEE
Lee, H., Jeun, I., Chun, K., & Song, J. A new anti-phishing method in OpenID. In Second International Conference on Emerging
Security Information, Systems and Technologies, 2008 (pp. 243-247): IEEE
Lee, K., Caverlee, J., & Webb, S. (2010). Uncovering social spammers: social honeypots + machine learning. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval,
Geneva, Switzerland,
Lee, S., & Kim, J. WarningBird: Detecting Suspicious URLs in Twitter Stream. In Network & Distributed System Security
Symposium(NDSS), San Diego, USA, 2012
Lei, T., Huan, L., & Jianping, Z. (2012). Identifying Evolving Groups in Dynamic Multimode Networks. Knowledge and Data
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 24(1), 72-85, doi:10.1109/tkde.2011.159.
Lemos, R. (2014). Phishing Attacks Increasingly Focus on Social Networks, Studies Show. http://www.eweek.com/security/phishingattacks-increasingly-focus-on-social-networks-studies-show.html.
Li, L., & Helenius, M. (2007). Usability evaluation of anti-phishing toolbars. Journal in Computer Virology, 3(2), 163-184.
Likarish, P., Dunbar, D. E., Hourcade, J. P., & Jung, E. BayeShield: conversational anti-phishing user interface. In SOUPS, 2009
(Vol. 9, pp. 1-1)
Likarish, P., Jung, E., Dunbar, D., Hansen, T. E., & Hourcade, J. P. B-apt: Bayesian anti-phishing toolbar. In 2008 IEEE International
Conference on Communications, 2008 (pp. 1745-1749): IEEE
Liping, M., John, Y., & Paul, W. Establishing phishing provenance using orthographic features. In eCrime Researchers Summit,
2009. eCRIME'09., 2009 (pp. 1-10): IEEE
Litan, A. (2005). Increased phishing and online attacks cause Dip in consumer confidence. Gartner Study (June 2005).
Liu, C., & Stamm, S. Fighting unicode-obfuscated spam. In Proceedings of the anti-phishing working groups 2nd annual eCrime
researchers summit, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2007 (pp. 45-59): ACM
Liu, G., Qiu, B., & Wenyin, L. Automatic detection of phishing target from phishing webpage. In 20th International Conference on
Pattern Recognition (ICPR'10), 2010 (pp. 4153-4156): IEEE
Liu, G., Xiang, G., Pendleton, B. A., Hong, J. I., & Liu, W. 2011. Smartening the crowds: computational techniques for improving
human verification to fight phishing scams. In Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, (pp. 8): ACM
Long, B., Zhang, Z. M., & Yu, P. S. (2007). A probabilistic framework for relational clustering. Paper presented at the Proceedings of
the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, San Jose, California, USA,
Ludl, C., McAllister, S., Kirda, E., & Kruegel, C. On the effectiveness of techniques to detect phishing sites. In International
Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment, 2007 (pp. 20-39): Springer
Lundquist, D., Zhang, K., & Ouksel, A. Ontology-Driven Cyber-Security Threat Assessment Based on Sentiment Analysis of
Network Activity Data. In International Conference on Cloud and Autonomic Computing (ICCAC), 2014 (pp. 5-14): IEEE
Luo, T., Jin, X., Ananthanarayanan, A. & Du, W.(2012) October. Touchjacking attacks on web in android, iOS, and windows phone.
In International Symposium on Foundations and Practice of Security (pp. 227-243). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Ma, J., Saul, L. K., Savage, S., & Voelker, G. M. Beyond blacklists: learning to detect malicious web sites from suspicious URLs. In
Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 2009 (pp.
1245-1254): ACM
Malisa, L., Kostiainen, K., Och, M. & Capkun, S. (2016) September. Mobile Application Impersonation Detection Using Dynamic
User Interface Extraction. In European Symposium on Research in Computer Security (pp. 217-237). Springer International
Publishing.
Marforio, C., Masti, R., Soriente, C., Kostiainen, K., & Capkun, S. (2016). Hardened Setup of Personalized Security Indicators to
Counter Phishing Attacks in Mobile Banking. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Security and
Privacy in Smartphones and Mobile Devices, Vienna, Austria,
Marforio, C., Masti, R. J., Soriente, C., Kostiainen, K., & Capkun, S. (2015). Personalized security indicators to detect application
phishing attacks in mobile platforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.06824.
Martinovic, I., Zdarsky, F. A., Bachorek, A., Jung, C., & Schmitt, J. B. Phishing in the wireless: Implementation and analysis. In IFIP
International Federation for Information Processing, 2007: Springer
McGrath, D. K., & Gupta, M. Behind Phishing: An Examination of Phisher Modi Operandi. In Proceedings of the 1st Usenix
Workshop on Large-Scale Exploits and Emergent Threats (LEET'08), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2008 (Vol. 8, pp. 4)
McGrath, D. K., Kalafut, A., & Gupta, M. (2009). Phishing infrastructure fluxes all the way. IEEE Security & Privacy(5), 21-28.
Mclean, V. (2015). CYREN: cyber threats report the growing risk to business data 2015 q1.
http://pages.cyren.com/TrendReport_2015Q1.html?utm_campaign=ALL_ALL_2015_Q1_Trend_Report&utm_medium=pr
ess_release&utm_source=press_release.
McRae, C. M., & Vaughn, R. B. Phighting the phisher: Using web bugs and honeytokens to investigate the source of phishing attacks.
In 0th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2007 (pp. 270c-270c): IEEE
Medvet, E., Kirda, E., & Kruegel, C. Visual-similarity-based phishing detection. In Proceedings of the 4th international conference
on Security and privacy in communication netowrks, 2008 (pp. 22): ACM
Meijdam, K.C., Pieters, W. & van den Berg, J. (2015). Phishing as a Service: Designing an ethical way of mimicking targeted
phishing attacks to train employees. TU Delft.
Microsoft (2016a). Phishing scams that target activities, interests, or news events, Microsoft security and safety center.
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/safety/online-privacy/phishing-interests.aspx.
Microsoft (2016b). Sender ID Filtering. https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc526541.aspx.

33

Miyamoto, D., Hazeyama, H., & Kadobayashi, Y. (2005). SPS: a simple filtering algorithm to thwart phishing attacks. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of the First Asian Internet Engineering conference on Technologies for Advanced
Heterogeneous Networks, Bangkok, Thailand,
Miyamoto, D., Hazeyama, H., & Kadobayashi, Y. (2008). An evaluation of machine learning-based methods for detection of phishing
sites. In Advances in Neuro-Information Processing (pp. 539-546): Springer.
Modupe, A., Olugbara, O. O., & Ojo, S. O. (2014). Filtering of Mobile Short Messaging Service Communication Using Latent
Dirichlet Allocation with Social Network Analysis. In Transactions on Engineering Technologies (pp. 671-686): Springer.
Moghimi, M., & Varjani, A. Y. (2016). New rule-based phishing detection method. Expert Systems with Applications, 53, 231-242.
Moore, T., & Clayton, R. Examining the impact of website take-down on phishing. In Proceedings of the anti-phishing working
groups 2nd annual eCrime researchers summit, 2007 (pp. 1-13): ACM
Moore, T., & Clayton, R. The consequence of non-cooperation in the fight against phishing. In 2008 eCrime Researchers Summit,
2008 (pp. 1-14): IEEE
Moore, T., & Clayton, R. Which malware lures work best? Measurements from a large instant messaging worm. In APWG
Symposium on Electronic Crime Research (eCrime), 2015 (pp. 110): IEEE
Murtagh, F. (1983). A survey of recent advances in hierarchical clustering algorithms. The Computer Journal, 26(4), 354-359.
Nahorney, B. (2015). Symantec intelligence report. https://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/other_resources/bintelligence-report-01-2015-en-us.pdf.
Nagar, N. & Suman, U. (2016). Prevention, Detection, and Recovery of CSRF Attack in Online Banking System. Online Banking
Security Measures and Data Protection, p.172.
Nassar, M., Niccolini, S., & Ewald, T. Holistic VoIP intrusion detection and prevention system. In 07 Proceedings of the 1st
international conference on Principles, systems and applications of IP telecommunications, New York, NY, USA, 2007 (pp.
1-9): ACM
Navarro, J. N., & Jasinski, J. L. (2014). Identity Theft and Social Networks. In Social Networking as a Criminal Enterprise (pp. 69–
90): CRC Press.
Nguyen, D., Le, N., & Vinh, T. Detecting phishing web pages based on DOM-tree structure and graph matching algorithm. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Symposium on Information and Communication Technology, 2014 (pp. 280-285): ACM
Nikiforakis, N., Maggi, F., Stringhini, G., Rafique, M. Z., Joosen, W., & Kruegel, C. Stranger danger: exploring the ecosystem of adbased URL shortening services. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on World wide web, Seoul, Republic
of Korea, 2014 (pp. 51-62): ACM
Niu, Y., Hsu, F., & Chen, H. iPhish: Phishing Vulnerabilities on Consumer Electronics. In UPSEC'08 Proceedings of the 1st
Conference on Usability, Psychology, and Security, USENIX Association Berkeley, CA, 2008
Ollmann, G. (2007a). The Phishing Guide Understanding & Preventing Phishing Attacks. IBM Internet Security Systems.
Ollmann, G. (2007b). The vishing guide. http://www.iss.net/documents/whitepapers/IBM_ISS_vishing_guide.pdf, IBM, Tech. Rep.
Oppliger, R., & Gajek, S. Effective protection against phishing and web spoofing. In Proceedings of the 9th IFIP TC-6 TC-11
international conference on Communications and Multimedia Security (CMS'05 ), Salzburg, Austria, 2005 (pp. 32-41):
Springer
Pajares, P., & Abendan, G. (2013). http://blog.trendmicro.com/trendlabs-security-intelligence/author/paulpgeloabendan/.
Parno, B., Kuo, C., & Perrig, A. (2006). Phoolproof phishing prevention. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 10th international
conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, Anguilla, British West Indies,
Peterson, P. (2011). Email Attacks: This Time It’s Personal. http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en/us/products/collateral/security/emailsecurity-appliance/targeted_attacks.pdf.
Phish tank (2015). http://www.phishtank.com/.
Prakash, P., Kumar, M., Kompella, R. R., & Gupta, M. Phishnet: predictive blacklisting to detect phishing attacks. In IEEE
Proceedings of the 29th conference on Information communications, San Diego, CA, 2010 (pp. 1-5): IEEE
Rader, M. A., & Rahman, S. S. M. (2013). Exploring historical and emerging phishing techniques and mitigating the associated
security risks. International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications, 5(4), 23.
Ramanathan, V., & Wechsler, H. (2012). phishGILLNET—phishing detection methodology using probabilistic latent semantic
analysis, AdaBoost, and co-training. EURASIP Journal on Information Security, 2012(1), 1-22.
Ramesh, G., Krishnamurthi, I., & Kumar, K. S. S. (2014). An efficacious method for detecting phishing webpages through target
domain identification. Decision Support Systems, 61, 12-22.
Ramzan, Z. (2010). Phishing attacks and countermeasures. In Handbook of Information and Communication Security (pp. 433-448):
Springer.
Ramzan, Z., & Cooley, S. (2014). Method and apparatus for resolving a cousin domain name to detect web-based fraud. Google
Patents.
Ramzan, Z., & Wüest, C. Phishing Attacks: Analyzing Trends in 2006. In Fourth Conference on Email and Anti-Spam Mountain
View, California USA, 2007: Citeseer
Raufi, B., Ismaili, F., & Zenuni, X. Modeling a complete ontology for adaptive web based systems using a top-down five layer
framework. In ITI, 2009 (pp. 511-518)
Robila, S. A., & Ragucci, J. W. (2006). Don't be a phish: steps in user education. SIGCSE Bull., 38(3), 237-241,
doi:10.1145/1140123.1140187.
Robila, S. A., & Ragucci, J. W. (2006). Don't be a phish: steps in user education. ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, 38(3), 237-241.
Ronda, T., Saroiu, S., & Wolman, A. (2008). Itrustpage: a user-assisted anti-phishing tool. ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review,
42(4), 261-272.
Rosiello, A. P. E., Kirda, E., Kruegel, C., & Ferrandi, F. A layout-similarity-based approach for detecting phishing pages. In Third
International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communications Networks and the Workshops, 2007. SecureComm
2007. , Nice, France, 17-21 Sept. 2007 2007 (pp. 454-463)

34

Saberi, A., Vahidi, M., & Bidgoli, B. M. Learn to detect phishing scams using learning and ensemble? methods. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conferences on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology-Workshops, 2007 (pp.
311-314): IEEE Computer Society
Sanchez, F., & Duan, Z. A sender-centric approach to detecting phishing emails. In ASE International Conference on Cyber Security
(CyberSecurity), , 2012 (pp. 32-39): IEEE
Sanglerdsinlapachai, N., & Rungsawang, A. Web phishing detection using classifier ensemble. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Information Integration and Web-based Applications & Services, 2010 (pp. 210-215): ACM
Schölkopf, B., Platt, J. C., Shawe-Taylor, J., Smola, A. J., & Williamson, R. C. (2001). Estimating the support of a high-dimensional
distribution. Neural computation, 13(7), 1443-1471.
Shahriar, H., & Zulkernine, M. PhishTester: automatic testing of phishing attacks. In Fourth International Conference on Secure
Software Integration and Reliability Improvement (SSIRI), 2010 (pp. 198-207): IEEE
Sheikholeslami, G., Chatterjee, S., & Zhang, A. Wavecluster: A multi-resolution clustering approach for very large spatial databases.
In Proceedings of the 24th VLDB Conference, New York, USA, 1998 (pp. 428-439): institute of electrical & electronics
engineers
Sheng, S., Holbrook, M., Kumaraguru, P., Cranor, L. F., & Downs, J. Who falls for phish?: a demographic analysis of phishing
susceptibility and effectiveness of interventions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, Atlanta, GA, 2010 (pp. 373-382): ACM
Sheng, S., Wardman, B., Warner, G., Cranor, L. F., Hong, J., & Zhang, C. An empirical analysis of phishing blacklists. In
Proceedings of Sixth Conference on Email and Anti-Spam (CEAS), Mountain View, California, USA, 2009
Shon, T., & Moon, J. (2007). A hybrid machine learning approach to network anomaly detection. Inf. Sci., 177(18), 3799-3821,
doi:10.1016/j.ins.2007.03.025.
Shujun, L., & Schmitz, R. A novel anti-phishing framework based on honeypots. In eCrime Researchers Summit, 2009. eCRIME '09.,
Sept. 20 2009-Oct. 21 2009 2009 (pp. 1-13). doi:10.1109/ecrime.2009.5342609.
Silva, S. M., Zhang, Y., Winsborrow, E., Wu, J. L., & Schultz, C. A. (2015). Network infrastructure obfuscation. Google Patents.
Smustaca (2011). Multilingual Paypal Phishing. https://aviratechblog.wordpress.com/2011/02/01/multilingual-paypal-phishing/.
Social Engineer. 2017. Phishing as a Service (PHaaS) Understand susceptibility to phishing & raise awareness. [Online] available
https://www.social-engineer.com/phishing-service/
Song, Y., Yang, C. & Gu, G. (2010). Who is peeping at your passwords at Starbucks?—To catch an evil twin access point.
In IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, (pp. 323-332). IEEE.
Sponchioni, R. (2015). The phishing economy: How phishing kits make scams easier to operate.
http://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/phishing-economy-how-phishing-kits-make-scams-easier-operate.
Stern, A. (2014). Social Networkers Beware: Facebook is a Major Phishing Portal, Kaspersky Lab Research.
https://blog.kaspersky.com/1-in-5-phishing-attacks-targets-facebook/5180/.
Su, K.-W., Wu, K.-P., Lee, H.-M., & Wei, T.-E. Suspicious URL filtering based on logistic regression with multi-view analysis. In
Eighth Asia Joint Conference on Information Security (Asia JCIS), 2013 (pp. 77-84): IEEE
Sullins, L. (2006). Phishing’For A Solution: Domestic and International Approaches to Decreasing Online Identity Theft’(2006).
Emory International Law Review, 397.
Sullivan, B., Dito, B., Contreras, B., Klopfenstein, N., & McGuire, C. (2014). Cybersecurity Trends in Latin America and the
Caribbean. http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/other_resources/b-cyber-security-trends-report-lamc.pdf.
Sun, Y., Yu, J., Lin, S., & Tseng, S. (2016). The mediating effect of anti-phishing self-efficacy between college students’ internet selfefficacy and anti-phishing behavior and gender difference. Computers in human behavior, 59, 249-257.
Sunil, A. N. V., & Sardana, A. A pagerank based detection technique for phishing web sites. In Computers & Informatics (ISCI),
2012 IEEE Symposium on, 2012 (pp. 58-63): IEEE
Tally, G., Thomas, R., & Van Vleck, T. (2004). Anti-Phishing: Best Practices for Institutions and Consumers. Technical Report # 04004. McAfee Research, Mar. http://docs.apwg.org/sponsors_technical_papers/AntiPhishing_Best_Practices_for_Institutions_Consumer0904.pdf.
Taninpong, P., & Ngamsuriyaroj, S. Incremental Adaptive Spam Mail Filtering Using Naive Bayesian Classification. In 10th ACIS
International Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligences, Networking and Parallel/Distributed
Computing, 2009. SNPD '09. , 27-29 May 2009 2009 (pp. 243-248). doi:10.1109/snpd.2009.45.
Taylor, J. M., Raskin, V., & Spafford, E. H. (2011). Ontological Semantic Technology Goes Phishing, CERIAS Security Seminar
Presentation, Purdue University.
http://www.cerias.purdue.edu/news_and_events/events/security_seminar/details/index/7b9klvhc5urgkocuqblb1pohl0.
Toolan, F., & Carthy, J. Feature selection for Spam and Phishing detection. In eCrime Researchers Summit (eCrime), 2010, Dallas,
TX, 2010 (pp. 1-12): IEEE
Tsalis, N., Virvilis, N., Mylonas, A., Apostolopoulos, T., & Gritzalis, D. (2015). Browser Blacklists: The Utopia of Phishing
Protection. Paper presented at the 11th International Joint Conference on E-Business and Telecommunications, Cham,
Tseng, S.-S., Chen, K.-Y., Lee, T.-J., & Weng, J.-F. Automatic Content Generation for Anti-phishing Education Game. In
International Conference on Electrical and Control Engineering (ICECE). Beijing, China, 2011 (pp. 6390-6394): IEEE
Van der Merwe, A., Seker, R., & Gerber, A. Phishing in the system of systems settings: mobile technology. In IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 2005 (Vol. 1, pp. 492-498): IEEE
van der Merwe, A., Seker, R., & Gerber, A. Phishing in the system of systems settings: mobile technology. In IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2005 Corti, France 10-12 Oct. 2005 2005 (Vol. 1, pp. 492-498 Vol. 491)
Virvilis, N., Mylonas, A., Tsalis, N., & Gritzalis, D. (2015). Security Busters: Web Browser security vs. rogue sites. Computers &
Security, 52, 90-105.
Virvilis, N., Tsalis, N., Mylonas, A., & Gritzalis, D. Mobile Devices-A Phisher's Paradise. In 11th International Conference on
Security and Cryptography (SECRYPT), 2014 (pp. 1-9)
Wang, W., Zeng, G., & Tang, D. (2010). Using evidence based content trust model for spam detection. Expert Systems with
Applications, 37(8), 5599-5606, doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2010.02.053.

35

Wang, X., Zhang, R., Yang, X., Jiang, X., & Wijesekera, D. Voice pharming attack and the trust of VoIP. In Proceedings of the 4th
international conference on Security and privacy in communication netowrks, 2008 (pp. 24): ACM
Wang, Y., Wong, J., & Miner, A. Anomaly intrusion detection using one class SVM. In Information Assurance Workshop, 2004.
Proceedings from the Fifth Annual IEEE SMC, 10-11 June 2004 2004 (pp. 358-364). doi:10.1109/iaw.2004.1437839.
Weaver, R., & Collins, M. P. Fishing for phishes: Applying capture-recapture methods to estimate phishing populations. In
Proceedings of the anti-phishing working groups 2nd annual eCrime researchers summit, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2007 (pp.
14-25): ACM
Weider, Y., Nargundkar, S., & Tiruthani, N. Phishcatch-a phishing detection tool. In 2009 33rd Annual IEEE International Computer
Software and Applications Conference, 2009 (Vol. 2, pp. 451-456): IEEE
Wenyin, L., Fang, N., Quan, X., Qiu, B., & Liu, G. (2010). Discovering phishing target based on semantic link network. Future
Generation Computer Systems, 26(3), 381-388.
Wenyin, L., Huang, G., Xiaoyue, L., Min, Z., & Deng, X. Detection of phishing webpages based on visual similarity. In Special
interest tracks and posters of the 14th international conference on World Wide Web, Chiba, Japan, 2005 (pp. 1060-1061).
1062868: ACM. doi:10.1145/1062745.1062868.
Wenyin, L., Xiaotie, D., Guanglin, H., & Y, F. A. (2006). An antiphishing strategy based on visual similarity assessment. IEEE
Internet Computing, 10(2), 58.
Wetzel, R. (2005). Tackling phishing. Business Communications Review, 35(2), 46-49.
Whittaker, C., Ryner, B., & Nazif, M. Large-Scale Automatic Classification of Phishing Pages. In NDSS, 2010 (Vol. 10)
Wilson, M., & Hash, J. (2003). Building an information technology security awareness and training program. NIST Special
publication, 800, 50.
Wright, R. T., & Marett, K. (2010). The influence of experiential and dispositional factors in phishing: an empirical investigation of
the deceived. Journal of Management Information Systems, 27(1), 273-303.
Wu, L., Du, X., & Wu, J. MobiFish: A lightweight anti-phishing scheme for mobile phones. In 2014 23rd International Conference
on Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN), 2014 (pp. 1-8): IEEE
Wu, M. (2006). Fighting phishing at the user interface. PhD diss. Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Wu, M., Miller, R. C., & Garfinkel, S. L. Do security toolbars actually prevent phishing attacks? In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in computing systems, Montreal, Canada, 2006a (pp. 601-610): ACM
Wu, M., Miller, R. C., & Little, G. Web wallet: preventing phishing attacks by revealing user intentions. In Proceedings of the second
symposium on Usable privacy and security, 2006b (pp. 102-113): ACM
Wüest, C. (2010). The Risks of Social Networking. Symantec [Online] http://www. symantec.
com/content/en/us/enterprise/media/security_response/whitepapers/the_risks_of_social_networking. pdf.
Wu, L., Du, X. and Wu, J.(2016). Effective defense schemes for phishing attacks on mobile computing platforms. IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, 65(8), pp.6678-6691.
Xiang, G., Hong, J., Rose, C. P., & Cranor, L. (2011). Cantina+: A feature-rich machine learning framework for detecting phishing
web sites. ACM Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC), 14(2), 21.
Xiang, G., & Hong, J. I. (2009). A hybrid phish detection approach by identity discovery and keywords retrieval. Paper presented at
the Proceedings of the 18th international conference on World wide web, Madrid, Spain,
Xun, D., Clark, J. A., & Jacob, J. L. User behaviour based phishing websites detection. In International Multiconference on Computer
Science and Information Technology, 2008. IMCSIT 2008., Wisla, POLAND, 20-22 Oct. 2008 2008 (pp. 783-790)
Yadav, S., Reddy, A. K. K., Reddy, A., & Ranjan, S. Detecting algorithmically generated malicious domain names. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement, Melbourne, Australia, 2010 (pp. 48-61): ACM
Yearwood, J., Webb, D., Ma, L., Vamplew, P., Ofoghi, B., & Kelarev, A. Applying clustering and ensemble clustering approaches to
phishing profiling. In Proc. of the 8th Australasian Data Mining Conference (AusDM'09), Melbourne, Australia, 2009
(Vol. Vol 101, pp. 25-34): CRPIT
Yee, K.-P., & Sitaker, K. Passpet: convenient password management and phishing protection. In Proceedings of the second
symposium on Usable privacy and security, Pittsburgh, PA, 2006 (pp. 32-43): ACM
Ying, P., & Xuhua, D. Anomaly Based Web Phishing Page Detection. In 22nd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference
(ACSAC '06), Miami Beach, FL Dec. 2006 2006 (pp. 381-392)
Youn, S., & McLeod, D. (2009). Spam decisions on gray e-mail using personalized ontologies. Paper presented at the Proceedings of
the 2009 ACM symposium on Applied Computing, Honolulu, Hawaii,
Yu, W. D., Nargundkar, S., & Tiruthani, N. A phishing vulnerability analysis of web based systems. In IEEE Symposium on
Computers and Communications, 2008 (pp. 326-331): IEEE
Yue, C., & Wang, H. (2010). BogusBiter: A transparent protection against phishing attacks. ACM Transactions on Internet
Technology (TOIT), 10(2), 6.
Yue, Z., Serge, E., Lorrie, C., & Jason, H. Phinding phish: Evaluating anti-phishing tools. In the 14th Annual Network and
Distributed System Security Symposiom, 2006
Zhan, J., & Thomas, L. Phishing detection using stochastic learning-based weak estimators. In IEEE Symposium on Computational
Intelligence in Cyber Security (CICS'11), 2011 (pp. 55-59): IEEE
Zhang, J., Shoushan Luo, Gong, Z., Ouyang, X., Wu, C., & Xin, Y. 2011a. Protection against Phishing Attacks: a survey.
International Journal of Advancements in Computing Technology(IJACT), 3(9), 155-164.
Zhang, W., Ding, Y.X., Tang, Y. & Zhao, B.(2011b). Malicious web page detection based on on-line learning algorithm. In Machine
Learning and Cybernetics (ICMLC), International Conference on (Vol. 4, pp. 1914-1919). IEEE.
Zhang, Y., Hong, J., & Cranor, L. Cantina: a content-based approach to detecting phishing web sites. In Proceedings of the 16th
international conference on World Wide Web, Banff, Alberta, Canada, 2007a (pp. 639-648). 1242659: ACM.
doi:10.1145/1242572.1242659.
Zhang, Y., Jason I. Hong, & Cranor., L. F. Cantina: a content-based approach to detecting phishing web sites. In Proceedings of the
16th international conference on World Wide Web, 2007b (pp. 639-648): ACM

36

Zhou, C. V., Leckie, C., Karunasekera, S., & Peng, T. A self-healing, self-protecting collaborative intrusion detection architecture to
trace-back fast-flux phishing domains. In Network Operations and Management Symposium Workshops, 2008 (pp. 321327): IEEE
Zhuang, W., Ye, Y., Chen, Y., & Li, T. (2012). Ensemble clustering for internet security applications. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, 42(6), 1784-1796.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL (APPENDICES)
A. A Comparison between Phishing and Spam
Criteria
Difficulty
Main Objective
Models

Scheme
Target*
Transience*
Dynamic*

Table A.1: Comparison between phishing and spam
Spam attempts
Phishing attempts
Easy to initiate/ easy to be
Harder to initiate/cannot be
identified by spam filters
identified using spam filters
Advertise products
Bargain user data
• URLs that direct the recipient
• Pay per click
to spoofed web pages
• Affiliate marketing
• Downloading malware that is
• Promote shady companies
sent as part of suspicious URL
in an email message
Implausible
Looks credible
Sent to as many recipients as
Directed to a more targeted
possible
audience
Sent in frequent and large
Short-lived, often occurring for
batches
only a few hours
Advertising products or a
More dynamic, moving among
service from a known static
servers very quickly, redirecting
Web site
users to a private site

*Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG)
B.

Uptime for Phishing Sites

Figure B.1 shows the Uptime for phishing sites over different periods of time between 2008
and 2013. The Average Uptime varies from 72 hours in the second half of 2010 to 24:00
hours in the first half 2012. Based on Uptime metric, it is immature to conclude that there
is an increase in the success rate of existing countermeasures in detecting phishing attacks.

Up Time
Fig. B.1 Phishing sites Uptime (hh:mm), Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG)

37

C. Mass vs. Spear Phishing Attacks

Table C.1 shows a comparison between mass and spear phishing based on a security report
by Cisco. The report corroborates that spear phishing need not occur on a massive scale for a
typical phishing campaign to be effective (Peterson 2011). On the other hand, the costs of a
spear phishing attack are five times those of a mass attack, in view of the quality of the list
acquisition, botnet leased, email generation tools, malware purchased, website created and
campaign administration. Nevertheless, the value and profit of spear phishing are
significantly higher. Thus, for an individual campaign, the economics of a spear phishing
attack can be more compelling than a mass attack.
Table C.1. Economics of Mass vs. Spear phishing Attacks(a Cisco report)

Example of a typical Campaign

Mass Phishing

Spear Phishing

Total messages sent in Campaign
Block Rate
Open Rate
Click Through Rate
Conversation Rate
Victims
Value per Victim
Total Value from Campaign
Total Cost for Campaign
Total Profit from Campaign

1,000,000
99%
3%
5%
50%
8
$ 2,000
$ 16,000
$ 2,000
$ 14,000

1000
99%
70%
50%
50%
2
$ 80,000
$ 160,000
$ 10,000
$ 150,000

D. Fast Flux Attacks

In figure D.1, a malicious service f07b42b93.com hosts a phishing webpage. During a DNS
query issued at time , the domain’s DNS server replies with 10 records, any of this will lead
users to the phishing webpage. The short time-to-live (TTL) value, i.e., 300 seconds,
indicates that the records will expire after 300 seconds, so a new DNS query will then be
required. At + 300 seconds, the same query is re-issued and obtained another set of IP
addresses.
— Returned DNS records at time t+300 second —
— Returned DNS records at time t —
;; ANSWER SECTION:
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 68.45.212.84
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 68.174.233.245
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 87.89.53.176
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 99.35.9.172
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 116.206.183.29
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 174.57.27.8
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 200.49.146.20
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 204.198.77.248
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 207.112.105.241
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 209.42.186.67

;; ANSWER SECTION:
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 64.188.129.99
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 69.76.238.227
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 69.225.51.55
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 76.10.12.224
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 76.106.49.207
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 76.127.120.38
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 76.193.216.140
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 99.35.9.172
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 200.49.146.20
f07b42b93.com. 300 IN A 204.198.77.248

Fig D.1 An illustration of a fast-flux botnet rapidly changing the mapping of IP addresses to its
domain names (300 seconds apart).

E.

Content Injection Attacks
Table E.1. The URL sent in the Phishing email
http://www.well-known-financialinstitution.com/ ?q=%3Cscript%3Edocument.write
%28%22%3C iframe+src%3D%27
http%3A%2F%2Fwww.very-bad-site.com%27+
FRAMEBORDER%3D%270%27+WIDTH %3D%2
7800%27+HEIGHT%3D%27640%27+
scrolling%3D%27auto%27%3E%3C%2Fiframe %3
E%22%29%3C%2Fscript%3E&...=...&...

38

E.2. Translating URL into human Readable form
http://www.well-known-financialinstitution.com/
?q=<script>document.write("<iframe
src=’http://
www.very-bad-site.com’ FRAMEBORDER=’0’
WIDTH=’800’ HEIGHT=’640’ scrolling=’auto’>
</iframe>")</script>&. . .=. . .&. . .">

In Table E.1, A phishing email asks the user to click on a URL. The URL is not humanreadable, but it can be translated into a readable form after mapping the hexadecimal
characters, as shown in Table E.2. Then, the Javascript code embedded into the search query
will be executed upon visiting the target website, which will inject the HTML code (fetched
from www.very-bad-site.com) into the code the user’s browser would normally render.

F.

Countermeasures Classification based on Information Flow of Phishing
Table F.1: Phishing and Countermeasures (Jakobsson and Myers 2006)
Attack
Countermeasure
Step
0— Preventing Attack
•
Preemptive domain registration
•
Providing spoof-reporting service
•
Monitoring bounced email message
•
Monitoring account activity for anomalous activity
•
Monitoring the use of images
•
Establishing honeypots
1— Preventing delivery of phishing payload
•
Email filtering
•
Email authentication
•
Cousin domain rejection
•
Secure patching
2— Preventing a user action
• Education(e.g. missing personalized information in phishing
email)
• Display deceptive content canonically
• Interfere with navigation
• Detect inconsistent DNS information
• Modify referenced images
• Prevent navigation and data compromise
3— Preventing the transmission of prompt
• Filter out Cross-Site Scripting(XSS)
• Disable injected scripts
4— Preventing transmission of confidential information
• Anti-Phishing toolbars
• Black listing
• Screen-based data entry(e.g. graphical challenges)
• Mutual authentication
• Rendering data entry and making it useless
• Trusted paths
5— Tracing transmission of compromised credentials
• Take down phishing servers before data transmission
6— Interfering with the use of compromised information
• Multi-factor authentication(e.g. finger prints )
• Password hashing
• Transaction confirmation
• Policy-based data
7— Interfering with the financial benefit
• Delay transactions
• Detect flow of monetary gain

39

G.

URL Spoofing Techniques
Table G.1. URL Spoofing techniques
Article
URL Spoofing technique
Bad domain name
(Moore and Clayton 2007)
• Real domain http://onlinebanking.realbank.com
(Yadav et al. 2010)
(Felegyhazi et al. 2010)
• Fake domain
http://realbankS.com
(Yee and Sitaker 2006)
http://realbamk.com
(Herzberg and Jbara 2008)
http://onlinebanking.realbankS.com
(Prakash et al. 2010)
http://onlinebanking.realbamk.com
(Ramesh et al. 2014)
(Ramzan and Cooley 2014)
Shortened URLs
(Chhabra et al. 2011)
• Real domain http://www.zscaler.com/download(McGrath and Gupta 2008)
whitepaper_stateofweb-q4-2009.html
(Niu et al. 2008)
• Short URL
(Klien and Strohmaier 2012)
http://bit.ly/cikl0z
(S. Lee and Kim 2012)
• Redirection(Fake domain)
(Gastellier-Prevost et al. 2011)
http://www.zcaler.com/download(Chu et al. 2010)
whitepaper_stateofweb-b4-2009.html
(Nikiforakis et al. 2014)
Host Name Obfuscation
(Garera et al. 2007)
(Chandrasekaran et al. 2006)
• Real domain http://onlinebanking.realbank.com
(Tseng et al. 2011)
• Obfuscated URL
http://realbankS.com (IP: 173.193.212.4)
(Rader and Rahman 2013)
• Obfuscated URL as IP Address
(Su et al. 2013)
http://173.193.212.4/.
(Silva et al. 2015)
(Banerjee and Faloutsos 2013)
Encoded URL Obfuscation
(Chandrasekaran et al. 2006)
• Real domain http://onlinebanking.realbank.com
(Cova et al. 2008)
(Berghel et al. 2007)
• Obfuscated URL
http://realbankS.com
(C. Liu and Stamm 2007)
• Obfuscated URL(URL encoding)
(Hulten et al. 2014)
http%3A%2F%2Frealbank.com+

H. Features Used in Machine Learning-based Anti-phishing Techniques

Table H.1 provides a summary of specific machine learning algorithms and their input
features for phishing detection. The table shows that SVM and Naïve Bayes are the most
widely used phishing classifiers, and some other classification methods (e.g. Neural
Networks) are the least used. Among the clustering based techniques for phishing detection,
k-means is suitable for simple applications, and other clustering algorithms such as
Gaussian Mixture (Sheikholeslami et al. 1998) have been used in more sophisticated voice
phishing detection. Approaches such as one-class SVM anomaly detection (Y. Wang et al.
2004) have not been used to detect phishing websites. Nevertheless, one-class anomaly
detection techniques seem promising to detect zero-day/hour phishing − a novel phishing
attempt.
Table H.1: Machine learning-based anti-phishing techniques
Approach

Article
(Bazarganigilani 2011)
(Ma et al. 2009)

Classification

Naïve Bayes

(Aggarwal et al. 2012)
(Miyamoto et al. 2008)
Random
Forest

40

(Huh and Kim 2012)

(Fette et al. 2007)

Features
Email content
Lexical features, Host-based features: IP address properties,
WHOIS properties, Domain name properties, Geographic
properties
Website ranking, Number of results returned in search
Engines
Tweet content, length, hashtags, mentions, User posting the
tweet, Age of the account, Number of tweets, Followerfollowee ratio
Age of Domain, Known Images, Suspicious URL, IP
Address, Dots and dashes in URL, HTML from features
Email: IP-based URLs, Age of linked-to domain names,
“Here" links to non-modal domain, HTML emails, Number
of domains, Number of dots, Contains JavaScript, Spamfilter output. Website: Site in browser history, Redirected

(Ying and Xuhua 2006)
Support Vector
Machines
(Choi et al. 2011)
(L'Huillier et al. 2009)
Logistic
Regression
K-nearest
Neighbor
Neural
Networks

Rule based

(Abu-Nimeh et al. 2007)
(Choi et al. 2011)
(Abu-Nimeh et al. 2007)

(Bergholz et al. 2008)

(Aggarwal et al. 2012)
Linear
Discriminant (Huh and Kim 2012)
Analysis
K-Means
(Kuan-Ta et al. 2009)
Clustering
Anomaly
Detection

I.

DB Scan
Gaussian
Mixture

Rule based

site, Term frequency-inverse document frequency(TF-IDF)
DoM features and Objects: Keyword/Description (KD),
Request URL (RURL), URL of Anchor (AURL), Server Form
Handler (SFH), action of FORM
Lexical features (LEX), Link popularity features, DNS
features (DNS), Webpage content features, DNS fluxiness
features (DNSF), Network features (NET)
Email Text
Email header features, Email subject, Email body, Html
tags
Structural features: Email body, Number of body parts,
Discrete and composite body parts, Alternative body parts,
Link features: Links contained in an email, Total number of
links, Internal and external links, Links with IP-numbers,
Deceptive links, Links behind images, Element features:
scripting and in particular JavaScript, and whether forms
are used, Word list features: A list of words hinting at the
possibility of phishing
-

Webpage's image features
Size of email, Text content, Number of visible links in an
(Yearwood et al. 2009) (G. Liu
email, Greetings, Signature, Html content, script, Tables,
et al. 2010)
Image, Number of hyperlink in an email, Forms, Fake tags.
The decoding parameter of the selectable mode vocoder
(Jung and Lee 2010)
(SMV) extracted from the decoding process of the
transmitted speech in the mobile phone
IM Username in text, First URL message, Regular delay
time of sender, Regular response time of sender, Fresh
(Guan et al. 2009)
domain, IM username in URL + Low reputation of domain,
E-mail address in URL, Hostname is encoded, IP is encoded,
Confused URL, Domain in google search result
(Ying and Xuhua 2006)
(Chandrasekaran et al. 2008)
Email content

Client Server Authentication

Figure I.1 illustrates a site key authentication approach. As shown in the figure, once a user
has subscribed to a particular server, the site key (i.e. secret image) is stored in a user
machine, which can only be accessible by the corresponding sever. As soon as the user
accesses the login page, he is asked to validate his own key before entering his credentials.
Once the site key is validated, the user has to provide his credentials which are also
validated by server.
1. Login (html)
Client

Server

2. Site key validation

3. Credentials

Site
key

4. Credentials validation

Fig. I.1 Client server authentication approach

41

J.

A Comparison of Anti-phishing Tools
J.1 A comparison of anti-phishing tools in relation to our taxonomy
Table J.1: A comparison of anti-phishing tools

42

Tool

Communication
Media

Device

Attack
Countermeasure
Technique
Type

Performance
Metrics

User Study
Conducted?

Anti-phish
(Kirda and Kruegel
2006)
BogusBiter
(Chuan and Haining
2010)
Cantina+
(Xiang et al. 2011)
Quero
(Krammer 2006)

Website/browser
add-on

PC

Website Profile Matching
Spoofing /usage history

-

-

Website/browser
add-on

PC

Website
Spoofing

Page load delay

No

Website/browser
add-on
Website/browser
add-on

PC

No

Itrustpage (Ronda et Website/browser
al. 2008)
add-on
SpoofGuard
Website
(Chou et al. 2004)
PhishCatch
E-mail
(Weider et al. 2009)
PhishZoo
Website
(Afroz and
Greenstadt 2011)
BayeShield (Likarish
Website
et al. 2009)

PC

Website Machine learning TPR ≈ 0.92
Spoofing
/classification
FPR ≈ 0.040
Website
Text mining
Spoofing
/regular
expressions
Website Profile matching/ Accuracy=0.98
Spoofing/
blacklist
Website Profile matching / TPR≈0.972,
pattern
Accuracy≈0.67
Spoofing
E-Mail Profile matching/ Accuracy≈ 0.98
pattern
Spoofing
Website Profile matching/ Accuracy≈0.96,
Spoofing
pattern
FPR≈0.01

PC

E-Mail
Spoofing

B-APT
(Likarish et al. 2008)

Website

PC

Website
Spoofing

PhishTester
(Shahriar and
Zulkernine 2010)

Website

DOM AntiPhish
(Rosiello et al. 2007)
GoldPhish
(Dunlop et al. 2010)
PhishNet
(Prakash et al. 2010)
PhorceField
(Hart et al. 2011)

Website

PassPet
(Yee and Sitaker 2006)
PhishGuard
(Joshi et al. 2008)
PhishAri
(Aggarwal et al. 2012)
MobiFish
(Wu et al. 2014)
AZ-protect
(Abbasi et al. 2010)
eBay AG
(Abbasi et al. 2010)
Netcraft
(Abbasi et al. 2010)
EarthLink
(Abbasi et al. 2010)
IE Filter
(Abbasi et al. 2010)
FirePhish

Website

Website
Website
Website

Website
Social network
Mobile

Website
Website/browser
add-on
Website/browser
add-on
Website/browser
add-on
Website/browser
add-on
Website/browser

PC

PC
PC
PC

Client server
authentication

User based/IQ
test

Accuracy
≈ 0.75

Machine
Page load delay
learning/
≈ 51.05ms,
classification TPR≈1,FP≈0.03
PC
Website Profile matching/
FNR≈0.03,
Spoofing/
pattern
FPR≈0
Web
Forms
PC
Website Profile matching/
FNR≈0,
Spoofing
layout
FPR≈0.16
PC
Website Search engines TPR≈0.98,FPR≈
Spoofing
0.02
PC
Website Profile matching
FNR≈0.05,
Spoofing
/blacklist
FPR≈0.03
PC
Website
Client server
Bits of Security
Spoofing authentication
Lost per
user=0.2
PC
Website Profile matching/ Security and
Spoofing
usage history
Usability
PC
Website
Client server
Spoofing authentication
PC
Website Machine learning Precision= 0.95,
Spoofing
/classification
Recall =0.92
Smart Website Profile matching/
TPR≈1
Phone Spoofing
layout
PC
Website Machine learning Precision= 0.97,
Spoofing
/classification
Recall =0.96
PC
Website Machine learning Precision= 1,
Spoofing
/classification
Recall =0.55
PC
Website Profile matching Precision= 0.99,
Spoofing
/blacklist
Recall =0.86
PC
Website Profile matching Precision= 0.99,
Spoofing
/blacklist
Recall = 0.44
PC
Website Profile matching Precision= 1,
Spoofing
/blacklist
Recall = 0.75
PC
Website Profile matching Precision= 1,

-

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
No

No

No
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

(Abbasi et al. 2010)
Sitehound
(Abbasi et al. 2010)

add-on
Website/browser
add-on

PC

Spoofing
/blacklist
Website Profile matching
Spoofing
/blacklist

Recall = 0.77
Precision= 1,
Recall = 0.23

No

J.2 Raw Ranks of Anti-phishing ToolsTable J.2: Ranking of anti-phishing tools*
Tool

A

FPR

TPR

AZ-protect
0.164179 0.1486486 0.0357143
eBay AG
0.119403 0.1081081 0.1071429
Netcraft
0.134328 0.1216216 0.1428571
spoofGuard
0.134328 0.1216216 0.1428571
Earthlink
0.134328 0.0810811
0
IE Filter
0.059701 0.0405405 0.0714286
FirePhish
0.059701 0.0540541 0.0714286
Sitehound
0.059701 0.0540541 0.2142857
Google Chrome
0.134328 0.1216216 0.2142857
McAfee Siteadvisor
0
NA
NA
Symantec
0
NA
NA
Cloudmark
0
0.0405405
NA
GeoTrust TrustWatch
0
0.0810811
NA
Netscape
0
0.027027
NA
NA: missing values UM: Usability Measures

TNR

FNR

BLC&TPRO

UM*

0.26087
0.130435
0.26087
0.217391
0
0.086957
0.043478
0
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

0.142857
0.178571
0.107143
0.035714
0.071429
0.107143
0.214286
0.071429
0.035714
NA
NA
NA
0.035714
NA

NA
NA
0.142857
NA
NA
0.071429
0.214286
NA
0.214286
0
0.357143
0
NA
0

NA
NA
0
0.666667
NA
0.333333
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

K. A comparison of Commercial Anti-phishing Tools
Table K.1 : Comparison of commercial tools

PC

√

Aspect
√
√
√
√

√

√
√

√
√
√
√

√
√

√
√
√

√

√
√

√

√

√

√

VASCO Data Security 18

W

PC

√

Kaspersky17

W

PC

Wombat Security 16

E

PC

√
√
√

Iconix15

W,
E

Device(s)

√

Easy Solutions14

Communication
Media

√
√
√

√

√
√

Telefónica13

√

RSA® FraudAction12

√

Panda11

√

Websense10

√

FraudWatch
International9

√

BrandProtect8

√
√
√

PhishLabs7

√

GoDaddy6

Cyveillance3

√
√
√
√
√
√
√

Internet Identity5

VeriSign2

Detect, analyze attacks
Takedown
Fraud analysis
Forensic services
Email authentication
Email filtering
Web filtering
Hardware based 2factor authentication
Software-based strong
authentication
Mutual authentication
Law enforcement
enablement
Security awareness and
training
Prevent cousin domain

GlobalSign4

MarkMonitor1

Tools

√
√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√
√

√
√

E

W

W

PC

PC

PC

PC

PC

E

PC

PC

W,
E
W,
E

PC,
Phone
PC,
Phone

W,
E

W

PC

W

E

PC

PC

W,
E
W,
E

PC,
Phone

√

W

√

PC

√

W

√

43

44

Blacklist

7 http://www.phishlabs.com

Fast flux

Countermeasure(s)

Machine
learning
Client server
authentication
Machine
learning
Machine
learning

18http://www.wombatsecurity.com/trainingmethodology
13http://www.telefonica.es/
6 http://www.godaddy.com

Blacklist

16http://www.vasco.com

12http://www.rsa.com

Machine
learning
Machine
learning

Attack technique(s)

Spear Phishing

5 http://www.internetidentity.com

Vishing, Spear
Phishing
Website, email
Spoofing
Website
Spoofing
Website
Spoofing
Website
Spoofing

11http://www.pandasoftware.com

Email spoofing

4 http://www.globalsign.net

Blacklist

15http://www.iconix.com

Website

10http://www.websense.com

User training

3 http://www.cyveillance.com

Spear Phishing

Email spoofing

14www.easysol.net

Website, email
Spoofing
Website
Spoofing
Website, email
Spoofing

Client server
authentication
Client server
authentication
Machine
learning
Machine
learning
Pattern
matching

Email spoofing

9 http://www.fraudwatchinternational.com

User Training

8 www.brandprotect.com

Black List

Spear Phishing

2 http://www.verisign.com

Website Spoofing

17http://www.kaspersky.com

Client server
authentication

1 http://www.markmonitor.com

Website Spoofing

