EFFECTIVE APPLICATION OF GRASP
 PAOLA FESTA AND MAURICIO G. C. RESENDE
 Abstract. Agreedy randomized adaptive search procedure (GRASP) isan it
erative multistart metaheuristic for difficult combinatorial optimization. Each
 GRASP iteration consists of two phases: a construction phase, in which a
 feasible solution is produced, and a local search phase, in which a local opti
mum in the neighborhood of the constructed solution is sought. Since 1989,
 GRASP has been applied to a wide range of combinatorial optimization prob
lems, ranging from scheduling and routing to drawing and turbine balancing.
 In this paper, we cover the literature where GRASP is applied to scheduling,
 routing, logic, partitioning, location, graph theory, assignment, manufactur
ing, transportation, telecommunications, biology and related fields, automatic
 drawing, power systems, and VLSI design.
 1. Introduction
 Many combinatorial optimization problems especially those found in industry
 and government are either computationally intractable by their nature, or suffi
ciently large so as to preclude the use of exact algorithms. In such cases, heuristic
 methods are usually employed to find good, but not necessarily guaranteed opti
mal, solutions. The effectiveness of these methods depends upon their ability to
 adapt to a particular realization, avoid entrapment at local optima, and exploit the
 basic structure of the problem. Building on these notions, various heuristic search
 techniques have been developed that have demonstrably improved our ability to
 obtain good solutions to difficult combinatorial optimization problems. The most
 promising of such techniques include simulated annealing [Kirkpatrick, 1984], tabu
 search [Glover, 1989, 1990, Glover and Laguna, 1997], genetic algorithms [Goldberg,
 1989], variable neighborhood search [Hansen and Mladenovi´c, 1998], and GRASP,
 or Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedures, [Feo and Resende, 1989, 1995].
 A GRASP is a multi-start or iterative process [Lin and Kernighan, 1973], in
 which each GRASP iteration consists of two phases, a construction phase, in which
 a feasible solution is produced, and a local search phase, in which a local optimum
 in the neighborhood of the constructed solution is sought. The best overall solution
 is kept as the result. An especially appealing characteristic of GRASP is the ease
 with which it can be implemented. Few parameters need to be set and tuned, and
 therefore development can focus on implementing efficient data structures to assure
 quick GRASP iterations.
 In this chapter, we briefly review the literature of operations research and com
puter science applications of GRASP as well as industrial applications. We cover
 Date: April 8, 2009.
 Key words and phrases. GRASP, metaheuristics, applications, combinatorial optimization,
 local search.
 AT&T Labs Research Technical Report.
 1
2
 PAOLA FESTA AND MAURICIO G. C. RESENDE
 applications in scheduling, routing and transportation, logic and partitioning, graph
 theory, location and assignment, manufacturing, telecommunications and power
 systems. The chapter concludes with a section on applications in biology and re
lated fields.
 2. Scheduling
 GRASP has been applied to a wide variety of scheduling problems. One of
 the pioneering works illustrating a GRASP for scheduling is the paper of Bard
 and Feo [Bard and Feo, 1989] appeared in 1989. This paper describes a method for
 efficiently sequencing cutting operations associated with the manufacture of discrete
 parts. The problem is first modeled as an integer program and then relaxed via
 Lagrangian relaxation into a min-cut problem on a bipartite network. To obtain
 lower bounds, a max-flow algorithm is applied and the corresponding solution is
 input to a GRASP. In [Feo et al., 1996] Feo et al. proposed a GRASP for single
 machine scheduling with sequence dependent setup costs and linear delay penalties.
 Here, the greedy function of the GRASP construction phase proposed is made up
 of two components: the switch over cost and the opportunity cost associated with
 not inserting a specific job in the next position and instead, inserting it after half
 of the unscheduled jobs have been scheduled. This greedy function tends to lead to
 a balance between the natural order and nearest neighbor approaches. The local
 search uses 2-exchange, insertion exchange, and a combination of the two. Another
 interesting application of GRASP for solving real-world scheduling problems is due
 to Xu and Chiu Xu and Chiu [2001], who proposed effective heuristic procedure
 for a field technician scheduling problem, where the objective is to assign a set
 of jobs at different locations with time windows to technicians with different job
 skills. Several heuristics, including a GRASP, are designed and tested for solving the
 problem. The greedy choice is to select jobs with the highest unit weight. The local
 search implements four different moves, among them the 2-exchange and a swap
 that exchanges an assigned job with another job unassigned under the candidate
 schedule.
 Several hybrid approaches have been also proposed that combine GRASP with
 other techniques, including tabu search for the school timetabling problem Souza
 et al. [2001], path-relinking for the job shop scheduling Aiex et al. [2003] and Branch
 & Bound for the job shop scheduling Fernandes and Louren¸ co [2007] and a sched
uling problem with non-related parallel machines and sequence-dependent setup
 times Rocha et al. [2004], where at each GRASP iteration, the greedy criterion
 adopted to build a feasible solution consists in sorting the jobs in a non-decreasing
 order using the due date and then assigning each job to the machine that can finish
 it first. In 2008, two further interesting hybrid techniques have been proposed.
 In Alvarez-Valdes et al. [2008b], Alvarez-Valdes et al. describe a Reactive GRASP
 for a strip-packing problem, while in Alvarez-Valdes et al. [2008a] Alvarez-Valdes
 et al. propose several heuristic algorithms based on GRASP and path relinking for
 project scheduling under partially renewable resources. In this case, the greedy se
lection is based on a priority rule and the improvement phase consists of two steps.
 First, it identifies the activities whose completion times must be reduced in order
 to have a new solution with the shortest makespan and labelling these activities
 as critical. Second, it moves critical activities in such a way that the resulting se
quence is feasible according to precedence and resource constraints. In particular,
EFFECTIVE APPLICATION OF GRASP
 3
 the authors have designed two types of moves: 1) in a simple move, only a critical
 activity is moved, leaving the remaining activities unchanged; 2) in a double move,
 non-critical activities are moved to make the move of a critical activity possible.
 3. Routing and Transportation
 GRASP has been applied to several vehicle, aircraft, telecommunications, and
 inventory routing problems. In 1995, Kontoravdis and Bard Kontoravdis and Bard
 [1995] proposed a GRASP for minimizing the fleet size of temporarily constrained
 vehicle routing problems with two types of service. The greedy function of the
 construction phase takes into account both the overall minimum insertion cost
 and the penalty cost. Local search is applied to the best solution found every five
 iterations of the first phase, rather than to each feasible solution. In 1998, a modified
 and improved version of this GRASP has been extended for the inventory routing
 problem with satellite facilities by Bard et al. Bard et al. [1998], who proposed a
 methodology that decomposes the problem over the planning horizon, and then
 solves daily rather than multi-day vehicle routing problems.
 In 2002, Carreto and Baker Carreto and Baker [2002] have investigated the in
corporation of interactive tools into heuristic algorithms and proposed a GRASP
 interactive approach to the vehicle routing problem with backhauls. A GRASP
 has been used in the routes construction and improvement phase. The construc
tion phase is implemented in a clustering heuristic that constructs the routes by
 clustering the remaining customers according to the vehicles defined by seeds while
 applying the 3-opt heuristic to reduce the total distance traveled by each vehi
cle. The greedy function takes into account routes with smallest insertion cost
 and costumers with biggest difference between the smallest and the second smallest
 insertion costs and smallest number of routes they can traverse.
 In Corber´an et al. [2002] Corber´an et al. proposed a pure GRASP for the
 mixed Chinese postman problem, while a hybrid GRASP with tabu search has been
 proposed by Li et al. Li et al. [2004] for vehicle routing with both time window and
 limited number of vehicles. To efficiently solve the rural postman problem, de la
 Pe˜na de la Pe˜na [2004] published in 2004 an interesting case study to compare
 several metaheuristics approaches, including a simulated annealing, a GRASP, and
 a genetic algorithm.
 GRASP has been used also to find approximate solutions of problems in air,
 rail, and intermodal transportation. One among the pioneering paper illustrating
 these applications appeared in 1989 due to Feo and Bard Feo and Bard [1989a],
 who studied the problem of locating maintenance stations and developing flight
 schedules that better meet the cyclical demand for maintenance. The problem has
 been formulated as large-scale mixed integer program, i.e. a minimum cost, multi
commodity flow network with integral constraints, where each airplane represents
 a separate commodity and each arc has an upper and lower capacity of flow. Since
 obtaining feasible solutions from the relative LP relaxation is difficult, the authors
 proposed a GRASP. Another interesting paper is due to Arg¨uello et al. Arg¨uello
 et al. [1997], who described a GRASP to reconstruct aircraft routings in response
 to groundings and delays experienced over the course of the day. The objective is
 to minimize the cost of reassigning aircraft to flights taking into account available
 resources and other system constraints. The proposed heuristic is a neighborhood
4
 PAOLA FESTA AND MAURICIO G. C. RESENDE
 search technique that takes as input an initial feasible solution, so that the con
struction phase is omitted. Two types of partial route exchange operations are
 described. The first type is the exchange of flight sequences with identical end
points. In the second type, the sequence of flights being exchanged must have the
 same origination airport, but the termination airports are swapped.
 4. Logic, Partitioning, and Graph Theoretic Applications
 GRASP has been applied to problems in logic, including SAT, MAX-SAT, and
 logical clause inference. In 1996, Resende and Feo Resende and Feo [1996] proposed
 a GRASP for the satisfiability problem that can be applied to both the weighted
 and unweighted versions of the maximum satisfiability problem. The adaptive
 greedy function is a hybrid combination of two functions that seek to maximize the
 number of yet-unsatisfied clauses that become satisfied after the assignment of each
 construction iteration, and maximize the number of yet-unassigned literals in yet
unsatisfied clauses that become satisfied if opposite assignments were to be made.
 The local search flips the assignment of each variable, one at a time, checking
 if the new truth assignment increases the number of satisfied clauses. In 2006,
 Festa et al. Festa et al. [2006] proposed a hybrid GRASP with path relinking for
 the weighted maximum satisfiability problem (MAX-SAT). The authors designed
 accurate experiments to determine the effect of path relinking on the convergence
 of the GRASP.
 Partitioning problems have been also treated with GRASP. These include num
ber partitioning Arg¨uello et al. [1996] and software/hardware partitioning Pu et al.
 [2006]. In particular, in Arg¨uello et al. [1996] randomized methodologies are de
scribed for partitioning a finite set of integers into two disjoint subsets such that
 the difference of the sums of the elements in the subsets is minimized. Here, the
 greedy criterion consists in considering only large elements for differencing. In Pu
 et al. [2006], the authors propose a hybrid GRASP with tabu search as local search
 for software/hardware partitioning within timed automata.
 Perhaps the largest class of problems for which GRASP has been applied is
 graph theory. The wide applicability of GRASP to these problems includes among
 others the maximum independent set problem, the maximum covering problem,
 the Steiner tree problem, the max cut problem, the feedback vertex set and arc set
 problems, graph coloring, and the multi-criteria minimum spanning tree problem.
 For the maximum independent set, in 1994 Feo et al. Feo et al. [1994] proposed
 a GRASP whose greedy function orders admissible vertices with respect to the
 minimum admissible vertex degree, i.e. a vertex with the minimum degree and that
 is not adjacent to any vertex in the current independent set. The neighborhood
 definition used in the local search is (2,1)-exchange, where two nonadjacent vertices
 can be added to the current solution if a single vertex from the solution is removed.
 In Resende [1998], Resende describes a GRASP for the maximum covering problem.
 Here, the greedy function is the total weight of the yet-uncovered demand points
 that become covered after the selection and the local search procedures uses a
 2-exchange neighborhood structure.
 In Martins et al. [1999], Martins et al. proposed a GRASP for approximately
 solving general instances of the Steiner problem in graphs. The construction phase
 is based on the distance network heuristic. A distance network corresponding to
 the original graph is built and associated with each edge of the distance network
EFFECTIVE APPLICATION OF GRASP
 5
 is a weight that takes into account the shortest distances in the original graph.
 With respect to the new weight distribution, Kruskal’s algorithm is used to solve
 the minimum spanning tree problem and the edges in the MST so computed are
 replaced by the edges in the corresponding shortest paths in the original graph.
 The local search is based on insertions and eliminations of nodes to and from the
 current solution. A parallel version of a GRASP for the Steiner tree problem has
 been described in Martins et al. [2000], where the authors propose a local search
 that uses a combination of key-path based local search and node based local search.
 For the max cut problem, in 2002 Festa et al. Festa et al. [2002] designed and
 tested a GRASP, a variable neighborhood search (VNS), a path relinking heuristic,
 and new hybrid heuristics that combine GRASP, VNS as GRASP local search, and
 path relinking.
 Pardalos et al. Pardalos et al. [1999] designed a GRASP for finding approximate
 solutions to the feedback vertex set problem on a digraph. Several greedy functions
 have tested, all of them favoring vertices with high degree, while the local search
 procedure tries at each iteration to eliminate redundant vertices. In Festa et al.
 [2001] Festa et al. described a set of ANSI standard Fortran 77 subroutines to find
 approximate solutions of both the feedback vertex set problem and the feedback
 arc set problem. The GRASP of Pardalos et al. is used to produce the approximate
 solutions of the feedback set problem, while feedback arc set problems are converted
 into feedback vertex set problems and then solved.
 For graph coloring, in 2001 Laguna and Mart´ıLaguna and Mart´ı[2001] proposed
 a GRASP, whose construction phase greedy function chooses the vertex having the
 maximum degree among the uncolored vertices adjacent to at least one colored
 vertex. The local search combines the two smallest cardinality color classes into
 one and tries to find a valid color for each violating vertex.
 Very recently, for the multi-criteria minimum spanning tree problem in 2008
 Arroyo et al. Arroyo et al. [2008] proposed a GRASP, whose local search tries to
 improve the current solution by defining a drop-and-add neighborhood, where the
 spanning trees are represented by Prufer numbers.
 5. Location and Assignment Problems
 GRASP has been successfully used to find approximate solutions to location and
 assignment problems.
 Already in 1992, Klincewicz Klincewicz [1992] proposed two heuristics based on
 tabu search and GRASP for the p-hub location problem, whose local search pro
cedure is based on the 2-exchange neighborhood. Later, in 2005 P´erez et al. P´erez
 et al. [2005] described a hybrid GRASP with path-relinking algorithm for the ca
pacitated p-hub median problem. In this proposal, the greedy evaluation function
 has two phases: a location phase and an allocation phase. In the location phase, one
 element is added at each time to the set of hubs, while the allocation phase consists
 of an allocation to the nearest hub. As local search, the authors proposed a greedy
 procedure for location and an allocation to the nearest hub. For the p-median
 and other location problems, efficient multistart hybrid heuristics that combine el
ements of several traditional metaheuristics including GRASP have been recently
 proposed by Resende and Werneck Resende and Werneck [2004, 2007]. Here, the
 greedy criterion consists in choosing at each iteration one among the most profitable
 facilities, while the local search procedure is based on swapping facilities.
6
 PAOLA FESTA AND MAURICIO G. C. RESENDE
 Starting from the pioneering work of Li et al. Li et al. [1994], GRASP has been
 applied to several hard assignment problems, including quadratic, biquadratic, and
 multidimensional assignment. For the quadratic assignment problem (QAP), in Li
 et al. [1994] the authors describe a GRASP, whose construction mechanism defines
 a greedy function on the assignment interaction cost and whose local search proce
dure is a 2-assignment exchange. The construction phase of the GRASP proposed
 by Li et al. has been later applied by Ahuja et al. Ahuja et al. [2000] to generate
 the initial population of a genetic algorithm for the QAP. In 1998, Mavridou et
 al. Mavridou et al. [1998] proposed a GRASP for finding approximate solutions
 of the biquadratic assignment problem. As in the case of GRASP for the QAP,
 the construction phase has two stages. The first stage simultaneously makes four
 assignments, selecting the pairs corresponding to the smallest interaction costs,
 while the second stage makes the remaining assignments, one at time. The greedy
 function in the second stage selects the assignment corresponding to the minimum
 interaction cost with respect to the already-made assignments. In the local search
 phase, 2-exchange is applied to the permutation constructed in the first phase. An
 interesting study has been conducted in 1999 by Fleurent and Glover Fleurent and
 Glover [1999]. In their paper, they showed that the GRASP for QAP of Li et
 al. Li et al. [1994] can be improved upon by using memory strategies, such as learn
ing, intensification, candidate list strategies, and POP. For the multidimensional
 assignment problem, Robertson Robertson [2001] in 2001 proposed four GRASP
 implementations by combining two construction methods (randomized greedy and
 randomized max regret) and two local search methods (2-exchange and variable
 depth exchange). The greedy function of the randomized max regret construction
 method is a measure of the competition between the two leading cost candidates,
 while the maximum regret value corresponds to the candidate assignment that has
 the largest winning margin between itself and its next highest competitor. The
 variable depth exchange is an extension of the 2-exchange method that allows a
 more extensive search of the surrounding neighborhood space.
 6. Manufacturing
 GRASP has been applied to solve several optimization problems arising in man
ufacturing. The first paper example of this kind of application is due to Feo and
 Bard Feo and Bard [1989b], who in 1989 proposed a method for minimizing the
 sum of tool setup and volume removal times associated with metal cutting opera
tions on a flexible machine. The problem was modeled as an integer program and
 relaxed into a min-cut problem on a simple network. After obtaining a tentative
 solution, the authors used a GRASP to identify good feasible points corresponding
 to alternative process plans. The same authors in 1991 Bard and Feo [1991] de
signed an algorithm for the manufacturing equipment selection problem, where the
 objective is to determine how many of each machine type to purchase and what
 fraction of the time each piece of equipment will be configured for a particular type
 of operation. The problem has converted into a MILP and a depth-first B&B has
 been used, employing the greedy randomized set covering heuristic of Feo and Re
sende Feo and Resende [1989]. Viewing the contribution that any machine makes to
 satisfy the demand of any process as the unit benefit associated with that machine.
 To derive a feasible solution, the heuristic iteratively selects machines among those
 with largest benefits.
EFFECTIVE APPLICATION OF GRASP
 7
 More recently, for constrained two-dimensional non-guillotine cutting problems
 in 2005 Alvarez-Valdes et al. Alvarez-Valdes et al. [2005] proposed a GRASP, whose
 construction mechanism takes the smallest rectangle breaking the ties by the nearest
 distance to a corner of the stock rectangle. Then, two criteria have been considered
 to select the piece: 1) the first piece in a list ordered, giving priority to pieces which
 must be cut; 2) the piece producing the largest increase in the objective function.
 In 2008, Monkman et al. Monkman et al. [2008] described a production scheduling
 heuristic for an electronics manufacturer with sequence-dependent setup costs. The
 problem here studied involves assignment, sequencing, and time scheduling steps
 and has been modeled as a traveling salesman subset-tour problem. For the se
quencing step, the authors proposed a GRASP, whose construction phase uses a
 cardinality based RCL and the greedy function takes into account the cost asso
ciated with the arcs of the underlying graph. The local search uses two different
 neighborhoods: a node elimination and a node swap neighborhood.
 7. Telecommunications
 Telecommunications and network design are two fields of quite a large number of
 applications of GRASP. In the following, only some recently appeared papers will
 be cited.
 Liu et al. Liu et al. [2000] in 2000 proposed a hybrid GRASP for frequency
 assignment in mobile radio networks, whose local search is a simulated anneal
ing and whose construction phase uses two greedy functions. The first chooses a
 vertex from the set of unselected vertices with high saturation degrees, while the
 second function is used to assign a frequency to the selected vertex. Prais and
 Ribeiro Prais and Ribeiro [2000] designed a GRASP for a matrix decomposition
 problem arising in the context of traffic assignment in communication satellites.
 The local search phase of the GRASP proposed is based on a new neighborhood,
 defined by constructive and destructive moves. In 2003, Amaldi et al. Amaldi et al.
 [2003] proposed a GRASP and a tabu search to efficiently solve the downlink base
 station (BS) location problem. Here, during the local search the following moves
 are considered: removing a BS, installing a new BS, removing an existing BS, and
 installing a new one (swap). The output GRASP solution is used as initial solution
 for a tabu search algorithm. In 2008, Commander at al. Commander et al. [2008]
 have designed and implemented a GRASP for the cooperative communication prob
lem on ad hoc networks, where the problem consists in maximizing the amount of
 connectivity among a set of users, subject to constraints on the maximum distance
 traveled, as well as restrictions on what types of movement can be performed. The
 greedy function value of each candidate element is a measure of additional con
nections created by its insertion in the partial solution under construction. The
 local search procedure is based on a perturbation function consisting of selecting a
 wireless agent and rerouting.
 8. Applications in Biology
 It is only in the past few years that it has been shown that a large number of
 molecular biology problems can be formulated as combinatorial optimization prob
lems, usually computationally intractable so as to employ heuristic methods to find
 good solutions in a reasonable amount of running time. Brown et al. Brown et al.
 [2000] proposed a GRASP for selecting a population subset for use in a high-density
8
 PAOLA FESTA AND MAURICIO G. C. RESENDE
 genetic mapping project. At each iteration of the construction phase, the authors
 add to the partial solution one among the r unchosen population members which
 most improve the objective function value. The authors investigated very small
 sized RCL (i.e. r = 3 and r = 5) and the local search they implemented removes
 from the current solution some members and greedily includes other members, until
 no further improving exchange can be done.
 For the phylogeny problem (consisting in finding a phylogeny with the mini
mum number of evolutionary steps- the so-called parsimony criterion), Andreatta
 and Ribeiro Andreatta and Ribeiro [2002] and later Ribeiro and Vianna Ribeiro
 and Vianna [2005] proposed a GRASP and a variable neighborhood search and a
 GRASP that uses variable neighborhood descent for local search, respectively.
 Phylogenetic footprints are short pieces of no-coding DNA sequence in genes
 that are conserved between evolutionary distant species. Fried et al. Fried et al.
 [2004] showed that solving the footprint sorting problem requires the solution of a
 minimum weight vertex feedback set problem and for solving the latter, they used
 the GRASP provided in Festa et al. Festa et al. [2001].
 In 2007, Festa Festa [2007] proposed a GRASP to find improved solutions for
 the far from most string problem, where the objective is to determine a sequence
 far from most of the sequences in a given input set. In this case, it is intuitive to
 relate the greedy function to the occurrence of each character in a given position,
 while to realize the local search phase the 2-exchange algorithm has been used. A
 solution for the far from most string problem can help for example to identify a
 sequence fragment that distinguishes the pathogens from the host, so the potential
 exists to create a drug that harms several but not all pathogens.
 References
 R.K. Ahuja, J.B. Orlin, and A. Tiwari. A greedy genetic algorithm for the quadratic
 assignment problem. Computers and Operations Research, 27:917–934, 2000.
 R.M. Aiex, S. Binato, and M.G.C. Resende. Parallel GRASP with path-relinking
 for job shop scheduling. Parallel Computing, 29:393–430, 2003.
 R. Alvarez-Valdes, F. Parre˜no, and J.M. Tamarit. A GRASP algorithm for con
strained two-dimensional non-guillotine cutting problems. J. of the Operational
 Research Society, 56(4):414–425, 2005.
 R. Alvarez-Valdes, E. Crespo, J.M. Tamarit, and F. Villa. GRASP and path re
linking for project scheduling under partially renewable resources. European J.
 of Operational Research, 189(3):1153–1160, 2008a.
 R. Alvarez-Valdes, F. Parre˜no, and J.M. Tamarit. Reactive GRASP for the strip
packing problem. Computers and Operations Research, 35(4):1065–1083, 2008b.
 E. Amaldi, A. Capone, F. Malucelli, and F. Signori. Optimization models and
 algorithms for downlink umts radio planning. In Proceedings of Wireless Com
munications and Networking, (WCNC 2003), volume 2, pages 827–831, 2003.
 A.A. Andreatta and C.C. Ribeiro. Heuristics for the phylogeny problem. J. of
 Heuristics, 8:429–447, 2002.
 M.F. Arg¨uello, T.A. Feo, and O. Goldschmidt. Randomized methods for the number
 partitioning problem. Computers and Operations Research, 23(2):103–111, 1996.
 M.F. Arg¨uello, J.F. Bard, and G. Yu. A GRASP for aircraft routing in response to
 groundings and delays. J. of Combinatorial Optimization, 1:211–228, 1997.
EFFECTIVE APPLICATION OF GRASP
 9
 J.E.C. Arroyo, P.S. Vieira, and D.S. Vianna. A GRASP algorithm for the multi
criteria minimum spanning tree problem. Annals of Operations Research, 159:
 125–133, 2008.
 J.F. Bard and T.A. Feo. Operations sequencing in discrete parts manufacturing.
 Management Science, 35:249–255, 1989.
 J.F. Bard and T.A. Feo. An algorithm for the manufacturing equipment selection
 problem. IIE Transactions, 23:83–92, 1991.
 J.F. Bard, L. Huang, P. Jaillet, and M. Dror. A decomposition approach to the
 inventory routing problem with satellite facilities. Transportation Science, 32:
 189–203, 1998.
 D.G. Brown, T.J. Vision, and S.D. Tanksley. Selecting mapping: A discrete opti
mization approach to select a population subset for use in a high-density genetic
 mapping project. Genetics, 155:407–420, 2000.
 C. Carreto and B. Baker. A GRASP interactive approach to the vehicle routing
 problem with backhauls. In C.C. Ribeiro and P. Hansen, editors, Essays and
 surveys on metaheuristics, pages 185–200. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.
 C. Commander, P. Festa, C.A.S. Oliveira, P.M. Pardalos, M.G.C. Resende, and
 M. Tsitselis. A greedy randomized algorithm for the cooperative communication
 problem on ad hoc networks. In P.M. Pardalos e O.A. Prokopyev D.A. Grundel,
 R.A. Murphey, editor, Cooperative Networks: Control and Optimization, pages
 187–207. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2008.
 A. Corber´an, R. Mart´ı, and J.M. Sanchis. A GRASP heuristic for the mixed Chinese
 postman problem. European J. of Operational Research, 142(1):70–80, 2002.
 M.G.B. de la Pe˜na. Heuristics and metaheuristics approaches used to solve the rural
 postman problem: A comparative case study. In Proceedings of the Fourth In
ternational ICSC Symposium on Engineering of Intelligent Systems (EIS 2004),
 2004.
 T.A. Feo and J.F. Bard. Flight scheduling and maintenance base planning. Man
agement Science, 35:1415–1432, 1989a.
 T.A. Feo and J.F. Bard. The cutting path and tool selection problem in computer
aided process planning. J. of Manufacturing Systems, 8:17–26, 1989b.
 T.A. Feo and M.G.C. Resende. A probabilistic heuristic for a computationally
 difficult set covering problem. Operations Research Letters, 8:67–71, 1989.
 T.A. Feo and M.G.C. Resende. Greedy randomized adaptive search procedures. J.
 of Global Optimization, 6:109–133, 1995.
 T.A. Feo, M.G.C. Resende, and S.H. Smith. A greedy randomized adaptive search
 procedure for maximum independent set. Operations Research, 42:860–878, 1994.
 T.A. Feo, K. Sarathy, and J. McGahan. A GRASP for single machine scheduling
 with sequence dependent setup costs and linear delay penalties. Computers and
 Operations Research, 23:881–895, 1996.
 S. Fernandes and H.R. Louren¸ co. A GRASP and branch-and-bound metaheuris
tic for the job-shop scheduling. In Evolutionary Computation in Combinatorial
 Optimization, volume 4446 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 60–71.
 Springer, 2007.
 P. Festa. On some optimization problems in molecular biology. Mathematical
 Bioscience, 207(2):219–234, 2007.
 P. Festa, P.M. Pardalos, and M.G.C. Resende. Algorithm 815: FORTRAN subrou
tines for computing approximate solution to feedback set problems using GRASP.
10
 PAOLA FESTA AND MAURICIO G. C. RESENDE
 ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, 27:456–464, 2001.
 P. Festa, P.M. Pardalos, M.G.C. Resende, and C.C. Ribeiro. Randomized heuristics
 for the MAX-CUT problem. Optimization Methods and Software, 7:1033–1058,
 2002.
 P. Festa, P.M. Pardalos, L.S. Pitsoulis, and M.G.C. Resende. GRASP with path
relinking for the weighted maxsat problem. ACM J. of Experimental Algorith
mics, 11:1–16, 2006.
 C. Fleurent and F. Glover. Improved constructive multistart strategies for the qua
dratic assignment problem using adaptive memory. INFORMS J. on Computing,
 11:198–204, 1999.
 C. Fried, W. Hordijk, S.J. Prohaska, C.R. Stradler, and P.F. Stradler. The footprint
 sorting problem. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences, 44
 (2):332–338, 2004.
 F. Glover. Tabu search– Part I. ORSA J. on Computing, 1:190–206, 1989.
 F. Glover. Tabu search– Part II. ORSA J. on Computing, 2:4–32, 1990.
 F. Glover and M. Laguna. Tabu Search. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.
 D.E Goldberg. Genetic algorithms in search, optimization and machine learning.
 Addison-Wesley, 1989.
 P. Hansen and N. Mladenovi´c. An introduction to variable neighborhood search.
 In S. Voss, S. Martello, I. H. Osman, and C. Roucairol, editors, Meta-heuristics,
 Advances and trends in local search paradigms for optimization, pages 433–458.
 Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998.
 S. Kirkpatrick. Optimization by simulated annealing: Quantitative studies. J. of
 Statistical Physics, 34:975–986, 1984.
 J.G. Klincewicz. Avoiding local optima in the p-hub location problem using tabu
 search and GRASP. Annals of Operations Research, 40:283–302, 1992.
 G. Kontoravdis and J.F. Bard. A GRASP for the vehicle routing problem with
 time windows. ORSA J. on Computing, 7:10–23, 1995.
 M. Laguna and R. Mart´ı. A GRASP for coloring sparse graphs. Computational
 Optimization and Applications, 19:165–178, 2001.
 Y. Li, P.M. Pardalos, and M.G.C. Resende. A greedy randomized adaptive
 search procedure for the quadratic assignment problem. In P.M. Pardalos and
 H. Wolkowicz, editors, Quadratic assignment and related problems, volume 16
 of DIMACS Series on Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science,
 pages 237–261. American Mathematical Society, 1994.
 Z. Li, S. Guo, F. Wang, and A. Lim. Improved GRASP with tabu search for vehicle
 routing with both time window and limited number of vehicles. In B. Orchard,
 C. Yang, and M. Ali, editors, Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
 on Industrial and Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Expert
 Systems (IEA/AIE 2004), volume 3029 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
 pages 552–561. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
 S. Lin and B.W. Kernighan. An effective heuristic algorithm for the traveling
salesman problem. Operations Research, 21:498–516, 1973.
 X. Liu, P.M. Pardalos, S. Rajasekaran, and M.G.C. Resende. A GRASP for fre
quency assignment in mobile radio networks. In S. Rajasekaran, P.M. Pardalos,
 and F. Hsu, editors, Mobile Networks and Computing, volume 52 of DIMACS Se
ries on Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science, pages 195–201.
 American Mathematical Society, 2000.
EFFECTIVE APPLICATION OF GRASP
 11
 S.L. Martins, P.M. Pardalos, M.G.C. Resende, and C.C. Ribeiro. Greedy ran
domized adaptive search procedures for the Steiner problem in graphs. In P.M.
 Pardalos, S. Rajasekaran, and J. Rolim, editors, Randomization methods in al
gorithmic design, volume 43 of DIMACS Series on Discrete Mathematics and
 Theoretical Computer Science, pages 133–145. American Mathematical Society,
 1999.
 S.L. Martins, M.G.C. Resende, C.C. Ribeiro, and P.M. Pardalos. A parallel GRASP
 for the Steiner tree problem in graphs using a hybrid local search strategy. J. of
 Global Optimization, 17:267–283, 2000.
 T. Mavridou, P.M. Pardalos, L.S. Pitsoulis, and M.G.C. Resende. A GRASP for
 the biquadratic assignment problem. European J. of Operational Research, 105:
 613–621, 1998.
 S.K. Monkman, D.J. Morrice, and J.F. Bard. A production scheduling heuristic for
 an electronics manufacturer with sequence-dependent setup costs. European J.
 of Operational Research, 187(3):1100–1114, 2008.
 P.M. Pardalos, T. Qian, and M.G.C. Resende. A greedy randomizedadaptive search
 procedure for the feedback vertex set problem. J. of Combinatorial Optimization,
 2:399–412, 1999.
 M. P´erez, F. Almeida, and J.M. Moreno-Vega. A hybrid GRASP-path relinking
 algorithm for the capacitated p-hub median problem. In Hybrid Metaheuristics,
 volume 3636 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 142–153. Springer,
 2005.
 M. Prais and C.C. Ribeiro. Reactive GRASP: An application to a matrix decom
position problem in TDMA traffic assignment. INFORMS J. on Computing, 12:
 164–176, 2000.
 G.G. Pu, Z. Chong, Z.Y. Qiu, Z.Q. Lin, and J.F. He. A hybrid heuristic algorithm
 for HW-SW partitioning within timed automata. In Proceedings of Knowledge
based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems, volume 4251 of Lecture
 Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 459–466. Springer-Verlag, 2006.
 M.G.C. Resende. Computing approximate solutions of the maximum covering prob
lem using GRASP. J. of Heuristics, 4:161–171, 1998.
 M.G.C. Resende and T.A. Feo. A GRASP for satisfiability. In D.S. Johnson and
 M.A. Trick, editors, Cliques, Coloring, and Satisfiability: The Second DIMACS
 Implementation Challenge, volume 26 of DIMACS Series on Discrete Mathemat
ics and Theoretical Computer Science, pages 499–520. American Mathematical
 Society, 1996.
 M.G.C. Resende and R.F. Werneck. A hybrid heuristic for the p-median problem.
 Journal of Heuristics, 10:59–88, 2004.
 M.G.C. Resende and R.F. Werneck. A fast swap-based local search procedure for
 location problems. Annals of Operations Research, 150:205–230, 2007.
 C.C. Ribeiro and D.S. Vianna. A GRASP/VND heuristic for the phylogeny problem
 using a new neighborhood structure. International Transactions in Operational
 Research, 12:325–338, 2005.
 A.J. Robertson. A set of greedy randomized adaptive local search procedure
 (GRASP) implementations for the multidimensional assignment problem. Com
putational Optimization and Applications, 19:145–164, 2001.
12
 PAOLA FESTA AND MAURICIO G. C. RESENDE
 P.L. Rocha, M.G. Ravetti, and G.R. Mateus. The metaheuristic GRASP as an
 upper bound for a branch and bound algorithm in a scheduling problem with non
related parallel machines and sequence-dependent setup times. In Proceedings of
 the 4th EU/ME Workshop: Design and Evaluation of Advanced Hybrid Meta
Heuristics, volume 1, pages 62–67, 2004.
 M.J.F. Souza, N. Maculan, and L.S. Ochi. A GRASP-tabu search algorithm to
 solve a school timetabling problem. In Proceedings of the 4th Metaheuristics
 International Conference– MIC2001, pages 53–58, 2001.
 J.Y. Xu andS.Y. Chiu. Effective heuristic procedure for a field technician scheduling
 problem. J. of Heuristics, 7:495–509, 2001.
 (Paola Festa) Department of Mathematics and Applications, University of Napoli
 FEDERICO II, Naples, Italy
 E-mail address: paola.festa@unina.it
 (Mauricio G. C. Resende) Algorithms and Optimization Research Department, AT&T
 Labs Research, 180 Park Avenue, Room C241, Florham Park, NJ 07932 USA.
 E-mail address: mgcr@research.att.com