Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
 Operations Research Perspectives
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/orp
 Areview of simheuristics: Extending metaheuristics to deal with
 stochastic combinatorial optimization problems
 Angel A. Juana,∗, Javier Faulinb, Scott E. Grasmanc, Markus Rabed, Gonçalo Figueirae
 a Department of Computer Science, IN3– Open University of Catalonia, Spain
 b Department of Statistics and OR, Public University of Navarre, Spain
 c Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Rochester Institute of Technology, USA
 d Department IT in Production and Logistics, TU Dortmund, Germany
 e INESC TEC and Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Portugal
 a r t i c l e i n f o
 Article history:
 Available online 18 March 2015
 Keywords:
 Metaheuristics
 Simulation
 Combinatorial optimization
 Stochastic problems
 a b s t r a c t
 Many combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) encountered in real-world logistics, transportation,
 production, healthcare, financial, telecommunication, and computing applications are NP-hard in nature.
 These real-life COPs are frequently characterized by their large-scale sizes and the need for obtaining
 high-qualitysolutionsinshortcomputingtimes,thusrequiringtheuseofmetaheuristicalgorithms.Meta
heuristics benefit from different random-search and parallelization paradigms, but they frequently as
sume that the problem inputs, the underlying objective function, and the set of optimization constraints
 are deterministic. However, uncertainty is all around us, which often makes deterministic models over
simplified versions of real-life systems. After completing an extensive review of related work, this paper
 describes a general methodology that allows for extending metaheuristics through simulation to solve
 stochastic COPs. ‘Simheuristics’ allow modelers for dealing with real-life uncertainty in a natural way by
 integrating simulation(inanyofitsvariants)intoametaheuristic-drivenframework.Theseoptimization
driven algorithms rely on the fact that efficient metaheuristics already exist for the deterministic version
 of the corresponding COP. Simheuristics also facilitate the introduction of risk and/or reliability analysis
 criteria during the assessment of alternative high-quality solutions to stochastic COPs. Several examples
 of applications in different fields illustrate the potential of the proposed methodology.
 ©2015TheAuthors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
 This is an open access article under the CC BY license
 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
 1. Introduction
 We live in big cities with multimodal transportation systems,
 travel around the world using a complex network of intercon
nectedairports,buyproductsonlinethataredeliveredtoourdoors
 from different parts of the planet, make use of highly expensive e
health systems, keep in touch with our friends and colleagues us
ing Internet-based services, and our lives are tied to fluctuations
 in global financial markets. The world is becoming more complex
 all the time, and most of the systems around us are quite ineffi
cient– in terms of both monetary and environmental costs– due
 to the lack of tools to improve their design, reliability, and daily
 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: ajuanp@uoc.edu (A.A. Juan), javier.faulin@unavarra.es
 (J. Faulin), segeie@rit.edu (S.E. Grasman), markus.rabe@tu-dortmund.de (M. Rabe),
 goncalo.figueira@fe.up.pt (G. Figueira).
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.orp.2015.03.001
 operations. Most of the decision-making issues associated with
 the aforementioned systems can be modeled as NP-hard combi
natorial optimization problems (COPs) with uncertain (stochastic)
 conditions. Metaheuristic approaches allow for generating ‘high
quality’ solutions to these kinds of problems in relatively short
 computing times. Historically, they have been mostly applied to
 simplified scenarios where real-life uncertainty (i.e., stochastic or
 randombehavior) is usually not taken into account. There is, how
ever, an increasing trend for considering randomness into COPs as
 a way of describing new real problems in which part of the infor
mationis notknowninadvance. Thistendencycanbeobservedin
 [1,2], whoprovideareviewofmanytraditionalCOPswithstochas
tic characteristics. The analyzed problems include stochastic
 routing, stochastic scheduling, and stochastic reservations. Hem
melmayretal. [3] studied inventory routing problems considering
 stochastic product usage. A complete survey on the use of meta
heuristics to solve a wide class of stochastic COPs can be found
 in[4], wheretheauthorshaveclassifiedthereviewedmethodsinto
 2214-7160/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 63
 twomaincategories based onthewaytheobjective function is es
timated: (i) ad hoc approximation and (ii) simulation.
 Simulation techniques allow for modeling and artificially re
producing complex systems in a natural way [5,6]. Details can
 thus be incorporated into these models with no mathematical so
phistication and the computational time typically stays manage
able. However, complex models may require long development
 times and difficult verification and validation processes. More
over, simulation is not an optimization tool on its own. Therefore,
 simulation experiments need to be designed in order to gain an
 understanding of the model’s behavior with respect to both deci
sion and probability spaces. Modern design of experiments [7] can
 beafirststepinsuchastudy,helpingtoidentifypromisingareasin
 thesolution spaceorperformingsensitivityanalysis.Nevertheless,
 large COPsrequiretheuseofmetaheuristicstoconductanefficient
 search. This paper extends previous work in combining simulation
 with metaheuristics by proposing a new class of optimization al
gorithmscalled‘simheuristics’. These algorithms integrate simula
tion (in any of its variants) into a metaheuristic-driven framework
 to solve complex stochastic COPs.
 The mixture of metaheuristics with other methodologies is be
coming very popular in Operations Research as a good proce
dure to tackle difficult combinatorial optimization problems [8].
 While Bianchi et al. [4] presented earlier examples, Glover et al. [9,
 10] and April et al. [11] popularized the combination of simula
tionandmetaheuristicsbydevelopinganddescribingthecommer
cial optimization software OptQuest, which is currently integrated
 intoseveralcommercialsimulationpackages[12].Inordertomake
 OptQuest generic and compatible with any simulation model, the
 authors proposed a ‘‘black box’’ approach– for both continuous
 anddiscrete optimization problems– in which the solution proce
dure is clearly separated from the system. This approach is mainly
 oriented to optimizing a simulation model of the system, i.e., a
 discrete-event or Monte Carlo simulation model is generated for
 a given system and then OptQuest is used to optimize the control
 parameters of the system [13,14]. However, as discussed in [15],
 some approaches do not work well out-of-the-box. Instead, they
 need to be adapted to the specific characteristics of the problem.
 In those cases, closed software solutions like OptQuest might not
 be the most efficient ones.
 Inthispaper,wediscussdifferentwaysofcombiningsimulation
 with metaheuristics and how problem-specific information can be
 used to enhance the solution method. Our simheuristic approach
 has two distinctive characteristics:
 1. It promotesacloserintegration betweenoptimizationandsim
ulation. In particular, the evaluation of solutions is performed
 not only by simulation, but also by problem-specific analyti
cal expressions. Hence, it mixes simulation and ad hoc approxi
mations, although generic metamodels are avoided– while the
 simple nature of these models is appealing for optimization
 purposes, they do not accurately represent the real underlying
 system.
 2. The feedback of simulation can be used not only to evaluate
 solutions, but also to refine the analytical part, so that the latter
 is able to generate and/or evaluate more realistic solutions.
 The simheuristics described in this paper focus on the resolution
 of (discrete) combinatorial optimization problems with stochas
tic components. These stochastic components can either be lo
cated in the objective function or in the set of constraints. During
 the optimization process, our approach benefits from already ex
isting metaheuristics for deterministic versions of COPs. As illus
trated in Section 3, our simheuristics approach has been able to
 provide state-of-the-art solutions for combinatorial optimization
 problems in different application fields including vehicle routing,
 scheduling, manufacturing, system availability, and healthcare. As
 Fig. 1. Overview schema of the simulation–optimization approach.
 discussedlater, the combinationofmetaheuristicswithsimulation
 alsopromotestheuseofrisk-analysiscriteriaduringtheevaluation
 of alternative solutions to stochastic COPs. Finally, and following
 the criticism of Sörensen [16] regarding certain lack of innovative
ness in the field of metaheuristics, this paper also aims at ‘open
ing’ a new research line in this field by extending metaheuristics
 so they can solve– through their integration with different simu
lation techniques–anewsetofproblemscharacterizedbyreal-life
 uncertainty.
 The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 proposes a clas
sification of simulation–optimization methods and contextual
izes simheuristics inside this classification. Section 3 reviews
 recent applications of simulation–optimization approaches to dif
ferent fields, including: manufacturing and production, logistics
 and supply chain management, and healthcare. This review gives
 context to Section 4, which describes the main ideas behind the
 simheuristic algorithms we proposebyintegrating simulation into
 a metaheuristic-driven framework. Section 5 discusses further de
sign issues yet to be fully explored. Section 6 provides examples
 of applications to different industries, including: production, lo
gistics, and Internet computing. Finally, Section 7 summarizes the
 main conclusions of this work and gives insight about future re
search lines in simheuristics.
 2. Simheuristics as a simulation–optimization methodology
 Hybrid simulation–optimization (Sim–Opt) techniques and
 methods have been used for some decades; the first ranking-and
selection and stochastic-approximation methods were proposed
 in the 50s. However, the field has flourished in the last fifteen
 years or so, fertilized in large part by the increase in computational
 power, the development of advanced optimization methods (such
 as hybrid metaheuristics) and the emergence and dissemination
 of simulation software. Fig. 1 illustrates the previously introduced
 Sim–Optapproach, in whichbothtechniquesinteract to find near
optimal solutions to complex or stochastic optimization problems.
 Essentially, Sim–Opt methods have been developed by the
 simulation and optimization communities independently from
 each other, resulting in two intersecting approaches [17]: the
 simulation community developed the ‘‘simulation–optimization’’
 (SO) approach– focused in the optimization of simulation mod
els–, while the optimization community developed ‘‘hybrid
 simulation–analytic’’ (HSA) models/modeling [18]. This general
 classification is depicted in Fig. 2.
64
 A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 Fig. 2. Classification of Sim–Opt approaches.
 Source: Adapted from [17].
 Regarding SO, Swisher et al. [19] define it as a ‘‘structured ap
proach to determine optimal input parameter values, where opti
mal is measured by a function of output variables– steady-state
 or transient– associated with a simulation model’’. Thus, the opti
mization procedure uses the outputs from the simulation model,
 which evaluates the performance of a given solution. That solu
tion consists of a series of decisions, which are inputs to the sim
ulation model. On the basis of this evaluation, and on the basis of
 the past evaluations, the optimization procedure decides upon a
 new set of input values. Therefore, the simulation model acts as
 an evaluation function (EF) of the optimization procedure [20]. Al
ternatively, several sets of input values (each being a solution to
 the problem) may be simulated in order to construct a surrogate
 model (or metamodel) (Surrogate Model Construction, SMC) that
 can then besolved using classical optimization techniques instead
 of simulation [21]. The solution of the metamodel is then consid
ered as an approximate solution to the original problem. Several
 works in the literature discuss both EF and SMC methods [22–24].
 The commercial optimization module OptQuest [9,25] combines
 both these approaches. In this software, the EF component con
sists of a combination of two metaheuristics (scatter search and
 tabu search) whereas the SMC component uses a neural network.
 As far as HAS concerns, according to Shanthikumar and Sar
gent [18] anHSAmodelis‘‘amathematicalmodelwhichcombines
 identifiable simulation and analytic models’’, whereas HSA mod
eling ‘‘consists of building independent analytic and simulation
 models of the total system, developing their solution procedures,
 andusing their solution procedures together for problem solving’’.
 Anexample of an HSAmodelis any stochastic program with sam
pled scenarios (obtained via Monte Carlo simulation). Therefore,
 in HSA simulation is not typically used to evaluate the quality or
 feasibility of solutions, but to enhance either the analytical model
 (AME)ortogenerateapartofthesolution(SG).InAME,simulation
 is used to refine the parameters of a problem-specific analytical
 model.Thisanalyticalmodelenhancementstrategytendstobeless
 simulation-intensive than EF, since the optimization component is
 not dependent on simulation to validate its moves. In fact, as we
 move from left to right in Fig. 2, the dependence of optimization
 on simulation tends to decrease given that more problem-specific
 information is incorporated in the method.
 It is interesting to notice that, when looking at the hierarchical
 structure between simulation and optimization in Fig. 2, we can
 differentiate between approaches that are more optimization
drivenandmoresimulation-driven.Intheformer,theoptimization
 algorithm is the ‘driving’ agent and simulation acts as an ‘auxiliary’
 agent, being called whenever appropriate by the optimization
 agent (simulation-based optimization). In the latter, simulation
 acts as the driving agent to reproduce the behavior of a random
 system and then optimization is being called from time-to-time in
 order to find optimal (or near-optimal) values of some simulation
 parameters (optimization-based simulation). Finally, as shown in
 Fig. 2, simheuristic algorithms constitute a special case of Sim–Opt
 approaches that typically are optimization-driven, but can either
 beclassified as EF (SO)orasAME(HSA)dependingontheirspecific
 implementation.
 3. Areview onsim–optapplications
 In order to show some of the potential application fields
 of simheuristics as a particular type of Sim–Opt methodology,
 this section reviews recent applications of different Sim–Opt ap
proaches (both based on exact and approximated optimization
 methods) to different fields. The application fields include: manu
facturing and production, logistics and supply chain management,
 and healthcare.
 3.1. Sim–Opt applications in manufacturing & production
 In the scientific literature it is possible to find multiple exam
ples of Sim–Opt applications to the manufacturing and production
 field. Dengiz et al. [26] propose a tabu search algorithm, in con
junction with a simulation model of a just-in-time system, to find
 the optimum number of kanbans that meet production demands.
 Altiparmaketal.[27]proposeahybridmethodologytofindanear
optimal buffer size configuration for the asynchronous assembly
 system. Their methodology combines an artificial neural network
 model with simulated annealing. The former model is used to de
velop a filter-out metamodel that helps to overcome the fact that
 running simulations is extremely time consuming. Byrne and Hos
sain [28] apply a recursive optimization–simulation approach to a
 production planning probleminajobshopsystem.Arecursiveop
timization–simulation approach consists in alternating between a
 simulationandanoptimizationmodel,whereneitheristheleading
 agent.Thepurposeofsimulationiscomputingadjustedproduction
 capacities– which take into account the waiting times in the sys
tem– and refining them in the analytical model. Some improve
mentsontherecursiveoptimization–simulation approach, related
A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 65
 toproductclustering,simulationlength,andinventorylevelobser
vation, are proposed in [29]. Can et al. [30] present a comparative
 study of different algorithms for optimizing the stochastic buffer
allocation problem. Their experimental results show that it is pos
sible to enhance the performance of these algorithms by allowing
 theformationofinfeasiblesolutionsandtheincorporationoflinear
 penalty functions during the search process. Hubscher–Younger
 et al. [15] use MATLAB to optimize a chemical batch production
 process by means of their integrated approach, which combines
 continuous-time, discrete-event, and state-transition systems. In
 [31], the authors face scheduling problems in complex assembly
 lines. In particular, they consider the problem often referred to as a
 multi-mode,resource-constrained,multi-projectschedulingprob
lem with activity splitting. To solve this problem, they propose a
 simulation-based heuristic decentralized algorithm based on self
organization. Laroque et al. [32] present a hybrid approach of
 simulation and metaheuristics for an innovative, fast converg
ing procedure aimed at optimizing the parameters associated
 to a simulation model. Their approach uses a combination
 of particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithms as an
 automatic experimental design in a distributed simulation envi
ronment. These authors use a simple material flow simulation
 problemtoevaluatethesolutiongivenbythecombinedprocedure.
 Almeder and Hartl [33] deal with a scheduling problem related
 to a real-world production process in the metal-working indus
try, which can be described as an offline stochastic flexible flow
shop problem with limited buffers. The authors propose a variable
 neighborhood search approach in which the objective function is
 evaluated either by Monte Carlo simulation or by a detailed
 discrete-event simulation. Lin and Huang [34] address the issue
 of automated material handling systems in a semiconductor fab
rication plant. The stochastic and complex manufacturing process
 is represented by a simulation model, which is optimized using a
 particle swarm optimization metaheuristic. The algorithm is en
hanced by the use of optimal computing budget allocation, which
 reduces the number of required simulations. Finally, Gansterer et
 al. [35] present a Sim–Opt framework for hierarchical production
 planning. The frameworkisusedtoidentifygoodsettingsforthree
 planning parameters, namelyplannedleadtimes,safetystock, and
 lot sizes. Within a discrete-event simulation that mimics the pro
duction system, they use a mathematical optimization model for
 replicating the decision problem. This analytical model is solved to
 optimality using a standard optimization engine. The authors de
vise a variable neighborhood search procedure that embodies the
 OptQuest routine for local search purposes, showing better results
 than five other approaches.
 3.2. Sim–Opt applications in logistics & supply chain management
 Inside the logistics and supply chain management arena, Sub
ramanian et al. [36] combine mathematical programming and
 discrete-event simulation toassesstheuncertaintyandcontrolthe
 risk when managing a pipeline. The simulation component is the
 driving agent, which calls optimization when needed. Truong and
 Azadivar [37] embed an SG method in an EF approach to solve a
 supply chain design problem. Their genetic algorithm (EF compo
nent) focuses on main qualitative decisions and each chromosome
 is decoded by an analytic model followed by simulation (SG com
ponent). Subramaniam and Gosavi [38] present an SO approach
 aimed at solving a stochastic material-dispatching system in a re
tailer network. The problem they consider is one of determining
 the optimal number of trucks and quantities to be dispatched in
 such a system. They develop a model that accommodates several
 real-life considerations, and also discuss how it can be optimized.
 Theauthorsusetwooptimizationtechniques,simulatedannealing
 and neuro-response surfaces, to tackle the problem of dispatching
 material between a single warehouse and several retailers in an
 SO scheme. Jung et al. [39] approach a supply chain management
 problem under demand uncertainty. The authors have devised an
 optimization-based simulation framework, similar to that of [36],
 but where refinements are performed to the analytic model. The
 latter is thus solved using a rolling horizon within the simulation
 model. This procedure is repeated multiple times, performing (ev
ery n iterations) the appropriate refinements to the safety stock
 levels in order to accommodatetheuncertaintyofdemand.Junget
 al. [40] extend this study to multi-stage supply chains, while em
ploying a Sim–Opt approach in gathering information about the
 supply chain. Ekren and Heragu [41] discuss how to optimize a
 single-item, two-echelon inventory system where the items can
 be stored in several stocking locations. They perform a simulation
 based on two policies and five scenarios using the OptQuest tool
 and commercial simulation software. The goal is to minimize the
 total inventory, backorders, and transshipments costs, based on
 the replenishment and transshipment quantities. In their study,
 they find that the stocking location having cheaper transporta
tion cost has a clearing house role in the transportation problem.
 Also, they conclude that when the capacity increases until a cer
tain amount of the transshipment capacity value, the optimum
 cost decreases drastically. Almeder et al. [42] apply a recursive
 optimization–simulation approach to a stochastic supply chain
 planning problem. The results of multiple simulation runs are ag
gregated by quantiles, which enable consideration of different risk
 levels. Eskandari et al. [43] study the issue of channel coordina
tion for a supply chain consisting of one supplier and two retail
ers facing stochastic demand that is sensitive to both sales effort
 and retail price. The authors develop a decision support tool using
 SOfor supply chain coordination with revenue sharing or buyback
 contract. The SO decision support tool is then used to find the op
timum or near-optimum set of decision variables in the cases of
 centralized supply chains or coordinated supply chains using con
tracts. The authors conclude that, unlike traditional mathematical
 techniques that are subject to rather restricting assumptions, the
 use of simulation modeling and optimization allows for address
ing realistic scenarios. Alizadeh et al. [44] consider the problem of
 inventory models with deteriorating items, stochastic lead times,
 and Poisson demands. Their goal is to minimize the long-run total
 expected costs of the system when shortage is allowed, and they
 use OptQuest in their solving process.
 3.3. Sim–Opt applications in healthcare
 Duetothesocial andeconomicrelevanceofmodernhealthcare
 systems, this section offers a review of recent approaches in
 healthcareservicesthatcouldbeeasilysubstitutedbysimheuristic
 algorithms.In[45],theauthorsproposeanapproachthatcombines
 simulation with a genetic algorithm metaheuristic and a goal
 programming model. A similar approach is also employed in
 [46] to solve a multi-objective optimization problem related to a
 cancer treatment center facility. Although not described in detail,
 in [47] an algorithm integrating Monte Carlo simulation with
 simulated annealing is used to optimize patient arrival schedules
 in a multiple operating room surgical suite. Similarly, Iser et
 al. [48] propose a simple algorithm, also combining heuristics
 with Monte Carlo simulation, in order to obtain ‘good’ solutions
 for the problem of minimizing the expected cost of surgery
 scheduling, which include costs due to operating room overtime,
 as well as costs due to post-surgery (recovering) nurse-hours. Also
 related to the scheduling of patients for elective surgeries under
 stochastic usage of operating room capacity, Stanciu et al. [49]
 propose a relatively simple algorithm combining a heuristic with
 Monte Carlo simulation to determine the reservation of a fixed
 capacity across multiple customer classes. Arnaut [50] transforms
66
 A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 the problemofmaximizingtheutilizationofoperatingroomswith
 random processing and setup times into a stochastic job-shop
 problem with parallel machines and sequence-dependent setup
 times, and then uses a commercial simulator in combination with
 OptQuest to solve the associated stochastic scheduling problem.
 Rico et al. [51] study the best nurse allocation policy to manage
 patient overflow during a pandemic influenza outbreak. Their
 approach combines a commercial simulator with OptQuest in
 order to analyze different configurations regarding the number
 of nurses needed for healthcare delivery. Kasaie and Kelton [52]
 propose an approach combining agent-based simulation with
 response-surface optimization to solve a resource allocation
 problem in the control of epidemics. Silva and Pinto [53] develop
 a hybrid methodology to analyze the performance of a medical
 emergency system. They first create a discrete-event simulation
 modeloftheemergencysystem,andthenuseOptQuesttoanalyze
 different scenarios and find the best parameters for the simulation
 model. In their work, Weng et al. [54] combine a simulation
 modelwithOptQuestinordertooptimizetheallocation of human
 resources in a hospital emergency department. Finally, Kuo et
 al. [55,56] model the emergency department in a hospital using a
 commercial simulator, and then use simulated annealing to obtain
 ‘good’ estimatesfortheparametersassociatedwiththeprobability
 distributions in their simulation model.
 4. Basic logic behind simheuristics
 As previously mentioned, real-world sized instances of COPs
 are typically approached by metaheuristics. Likewise, real-life
 stochastic COPs can be naturally addressed by a combination of
 metaheuristics and simulation techniques (in any of its variants).
 In this context, a simheuristic algorithm is a particular Sim–Opt
 approachorientedtoefficientlytackleaCOPinstancethattypically
 contains stochastic components. These stochastic components can
 either be located intheobjectivefunction(e.g., random customers’
 demands,randomprocessingtimes,etc.)orinthesetofconstraints
 (e.g., customers’ demands that must be satisfied with a given
 probability, deadlines that must be met with a given probability,
 etc.). In particular, our simheuristic approach is aimed at solving
 combinatorial optimization problems of the form:
 Minf(s) = E [C (s)] or,alternatively,
 Maxf(s) = E[B(s)].
 Subject to:
 P (qi(s) ≥ li) ≥ ki ∀i = 1,2,...,n
 hj (s) ≤ rj ∀j = 1,2,...,m
 s ∈ S
 where:
 (1)
 (2)
 (3)
 (4)
 • S represents a discrete space of possible solutions s to the
 optimization problem.
 • C(s) represents a stochastic cost function (alternatively, B(s)
 represents a stochastic profit or income function)
 • E[C(s)]representsaprobabilisticmeasureofinterestassociated
 with the cost function (e.g., the expected value of C(s))
 • Eqs. (2) represent probabilistic constraints related to the
 problem (e.g., the probability that the service quality q(s)
 reaches a given threshold l is above a user-defined value k)
 • Eqs.(3) represent typical deterministic constraints in combina
torial optimization problems.
 Theuseofmetaheuristicsinside theSOarenahadalreadybeende
scribed by Olafsson [57], who highlights the importance of cov
ering the gap between the solutions of practical problems and
 their theoretical analysis—traditionally carried out by exact pro
cedures. We extend the study of simheuristics to the full spec
trum of Sim–Opt approaches, which include not only SO, but also
 HSA. Notice that simheuristics can also be applied to determinis
tic problems,whosecomplexityrequirestheuseofsimulation,and
 eventocontinuous-spaceproblems.However,ourfocusinthispa
per is on stochastic COPs since they appear frequently in real-life
 decision-making processes. Some examples of simheuristic appli
cation to different fields can be found in the Sim–Opt literature.
 Thus, for instance, Juan et al. [58] and Gonzalez et al. [59] com
binedMonteCarlosimulationwithroutingmetaheuristicsinorder
 to solve, respectively, the vehicle routing problem with stochastic
 demands and the arc routing problem with stochastic demands;
 Juanetal.[60]combinedMonteCarlosimulationwithascheduling
 metaheuristic in order to solve the permutation flow-shop prob
lemwithstochasticprocessingtimes;andJuanetal.[61]combined
 Monte Carlo simulation with a routing metaheuristic in order to
 solvetheinventoryroutingproblemwithstock-outsandstochastic
 demands.Also, as illustrated in [62], discrete-event simulation can
 be used in combination with a metaheuristic to solve other COPs
 with probabilistic constraints where the random behavior is con
ditioned by the time factor.
 Our simheuristic approach assumes that, in scenarios with
 moderate uncertainty (variance), high-quality solutions for the
 determinist version of a COP are also likely to be high-quality
 solutions for its corresponding stochastic version—of course, this
 doesnotimplythatthebestsolutionforthedeterministCOPhasto
 be the best solution for the stochastic version. Notice that, in most
 practical applications, this assumption seems to be reasonable.
 Also, notice that in scenarios with extreme uncertainty levels,
 individual outcomes can be extremely diverse and, therefore,
 optimization techniques should not be implemented in those
 cases. This ‘relationship assumption’ allows us to generate several
 ‘promising’solutionsforthestochasticCOPthroughthegeneration
 of a numberofhigh-quality solutions for the deterministic COP. As
 depicted in Fig. 3, given a stochastic COP instance, its deterministic
 counterpart is considered. This can be done, for instance, by
 replacing all random variables by their expected values, which
 is clearly optimistic. Then, a metaheuristic-driven algorithm is
 run in order to perform an efficient search inside the solution
 space associated with the deterministic COP. This iterative search
 process aims at finding a set of high-quality feasible solutions
 for the deterministic COP. During the iterative searching process,
 the algorithm has to assess or estimate the quality (or feasibility)
 of each of these ‘promising’ solutions when they are considered
 as solutions of the stochastic COP instance. One natural way to
 do this is by taking advantage of the capabilities that simulation
 methodsoffertomanagerandomness.Ofcourse,otherapproaches
 can also be used instead of simulation, e.g. dynamic programming,
 fuzzy logic, etc. However, under the presence of historical data
 on stochastic behavior, simulation allows for developing both
 accurate and flexible models. Specifically, randomness can be
 modeled throughout a best-fit probability distribution– either
 theoretical or empirical– without having to assume a Normal or
 Exponential behavior as other methods do. It should be noted that
 during theinteractive searching process only ‘promising’ solutions
 (i.e., those that perform well in the optimistic, deterministic
 case) are sent to the simulation component. Moreover, for each
 promising solution, just a reduced number of replications are
 run since only rough estimates are necessary at this stage. This
 strategy allows for controlling the computational effort employed
 by simulation during the interactive searching process, thus
 leaving enough time to the metaheuristic to perform an intensive
 search of the solution space. The estimated values provided by the
 simulation can then be used to keep a ranked list of elite solutions
 for the stochastic problem. They can also provide feedback to
A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 67
 Fig. 3. General scheme of simheuristics for solving stochastic COPs.
 the metaheuristic so that it intensifies exploration of promising
 searching areas. Once the computational time assigned to the
 iterative searching process has expired, more accurate estimates
 can be obtained for a reduced set of elite solutions by employing
 simulations with a larger number of replicas. These new estimates
 can then be used to re-rank the solutions.
 Aremarkablefactisthatthesefinalsimulationscanalsobeused
 to obtain additional information on the probability distribution
 of the quality of each solution. This complementary information
 can then be used to introduce risk/reliability analysis criteria in
 the decision-making process. In effect, since the objective function
 is stochastic, a decision maker might not only be interested in
 obtainingthesolutionthatoptimizesitsexpectedvalue,buthe/she
 mightbealsointerestedinanalyzingtheprobabilitydistributionof
 the values generated by several alternative solutions with similar
 expected values. As shown in Fig. 4, a risk-averse decision maker
 might choose a solution with a lower variability or risk (e.g., Sol2)
 over a more risky solution with a slightly better expected value
 (e.g., Sol1, which could go as higher as 60 cost units). Precisely,
 this risk analysis capability is one of the major advantages that
 simheuristics (and other similar approaches) can offer in a natural
 way due to the ability of metaheuristics to generate a plethora
 of high-quality alternative solutions and also due to the ability of
 simulation to provide a random sampling of observations for each
 proposed solution.
 In summary, simulation allows for extending existing and
 highly efficient metaheuristics– initially designed to cope with
 deterministic problems– so they can also be employed in solving
 stochastic COPs. This is the case in [63], where the authors discuss
 how the iterated local search metaheuristic can be naturally
 extended by combining it with simulation.
 Obviously, one major drawback of every approach combining
 metaheuristics with simulation is that the results are not expected
 to be optimal. Nevertheless, real-life problems are frequently NP
hard and stochastic. Therefore, simheuristics constitute a quite
 interesting alternative for many practical purposes since they
68
 A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 Fig. 4. Introducing risk-analysis criteria in the assessment of alternative solutions.
 represent relatively simple and flexible methods that are able
 to provide ‘high-quality’ solutions to complex real-life problems
 in reasonable computing times. The motivation for combining
 metaheuristics with simulation in general, and simheuristics in
 particular, is that it is often preferable to obtain an approximate
 solution to an accurate model of the real system rather than the
 optimal solution to an oversimplified model. Finally, the fully
 integrated and relatively simple design of simheuristic algorithms
 allows them to be extremely flexible, therefore promoting their
 integration with biased-randomized searching strategies [64] as
 well as with computing parallelization strategies [65].
 5. Further design considerations
 Other designs of simheuristics are possible. For instance, the
 simulation length may vary during the optimization process ac
cording to a statistical test that compares pairs of solutions. If dif
ferences are significant, the simulation process can terminate ear
lier (with less or shorter replications). In addition, the number of
 replications in each simulation may increase along with the meta
heuristic procedure, as new promising solutions become less fre
quent, so that it keeps some diversification in the beginning but
 converges with increasing confidence. The trade-off between di
versification and intensification has to be adjusted when shift
ing from a deterministic problem to its stochastic version. Indeed,
 since the selection of solutions involves some uncertainty, there
 will be cases where a worse solution is selected, even for high
 confidence levels. This introduces an additional diversification el
ement so increasing intensification may be advisable. One way to
 tune this diversification–intensification trade-off, as Figueira and
 Almada-Lobo [17] noted, is by changing the search scheme with
 respect to the alternation in the solution and realization (or proba
bility) spaces. As previously discussed, one realization for each so
lution(1R1S)allowsobtainingagreaterdiversificationofsolutions.
 Other schemes, such as different realizations for each solution
 (DR1S)andcommonrealizationsforeachsolution(CR1S)maypro
vide a better convergence to the detriment of diversification. CR1S
 is indeed a stream of research, widely known as sample path opti
mization [66] or sample average approximation [67], which advo
cates the importance of improvingtheconvergenceofSOmethods
 by converting the problem into its deterministic version.
 The aforementioned designs can be classified as evaluation
 function techniques since that is the mainpurposeofsimulationin
 the methodology. Nevertheless, simheuristics can also be applied
 in the context of analytical model enhancement methods, which
 are less simulation-intensive. An example is the work reported in
 [68], which is described in the next section.
 6. Potential and actual applications in different fields
 6.1. Production planning and scheduling
 In [60] theauthorsanalyzethepermutationflow-shopproblem
 with stochastic times, a generalization of the well-known permu
tation flow-shop problem (NP-hard) in which the processing time
 of each job i in each machine j is a random variable Pij following
 a positive probability distribution. Since uncertainty is present in
 mostreal-life processesandsystems,consideringrandomprocess
ing times represents a more realistic scenario than simply consid
ering deterministic times. As a result, unforeseen circumstances
 can lead to sudden changes in the processing time of certain jobs
 in certain machines, which is likely to have noticeable effects on
 the predicted makespan, i.e., the total completion time of all jobs.
 OnenaturalgoalwhendealingwiththisstochasticCOPistodeter
mineasequenceofjobsthatminimizestheexpectedmakespan.In
 thearticlesbyDodin[69],Honkompetal.[70],Gourgandetal.[71],
 andBakerandAltheimer[72],simulation–optimizationtechniques
 had been used to get results for the stochastic version of the prob
lem. In most of these articles, however, assumptions were made
 about the probability distributions employed to model processing
 times, e.g., Normal or Exponential, or about the restricted size of
 the instances being analyzed. In a real-life scenario, the specific
 distributions to be used will have to be fitted from historical data
 (observations) leading to empirical distributions. To overcome
 these restrictive assumptions, Juan et al. [60] propose a simheuris
tic algorithm. The main idea behind their approach is to transform
 the initial stochastic instance into its corresponding deterministic
 instance– by considering average, instead of random, processing
 times– and then solve the determinist instance using an efficient
 metaheuristic. Since any solution s for the deterministic instance
 will be also a feasible solution for the stochastic version, they
 use Monte Carlo simulation to obtain estimates for the expected
 makespan associated with s. Simulation is used here to determine
 whichsolution, among thebest-found deterministic ones, shows a
 lowerexpectedmakespanwhenconsideringstochastictimes.This
 strategy assumes that a strong correlation exists between high
quality solutions for the deterministic version of the problem and
 high-qualitysolutionsforthestochasticversion.However,notnec
essarily the best-found solution for the deterministic version will
 becomethebest-foundsolutionforthestochasticversionsincethe
 resulting makespan of the former might be quite sensitive to vari
ations in the processing times. Specific sensitivity analysis could
 be used here to measure how robust this assumption is [73]. Also,
 as the authors discuss, the information provided by the simula
tion can be employed to perform a survival analysis of alterna
tive solutions with similar expected makespan. This way, proba
bilities of completing the jobs before a given deadline can be com
pared among different solutions (Fig. 5). In this specific case, the
 first solution exhibits a higher probability of meeting a deadline
 not greater than 4000 s. However, for greater values, the second
 solution should perform better. Current studies are extended to
 the problem of mid-term scheduling of production under relaxed
 constraints, e.g., with algorithms that allow for changing the fac
tory capabilities and capacities for the future. Such an approach
 leads to so-called ‘changing steady-state’ systems that show a high
 complexity with respect to the high number and diversity of re
lationships. Discrete-event simulation seems a good candidate to
 approachthis kind of problemsincombinationwithmetaheuristic
 algorithms [74].
 Another example of simheuristics in production planning is
 presented by Figueira et al. [68]. The authors approach the
 production planning and scheduling of an integrated pulp and
 paper mill, subject to process variability and disturbances. The
 former can be modeled by probability distributions. The latter,
A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 69
 Fig. 5. Using cumulative density functions to compare alternative solutions.
 however, needs a distribution for the time between failures
 and another for the time to repair. This behavior cannot be
 easily modeled by stochastic programming approaches. Monte
 Carlo simulation also fails to provide the necessary detail.
 Therefore, a discrete-event simulation model is developed for
 mimicking the execution of production plans while considering
 both process variability and disturbances. The deterministic
 problem is formulated as a mixed integer programming model,
 which comprises a combinatorial part (related to the sequence of
 papercampaigns)andacontinuouspart(regardingtheproduction
 rates and quantities). Since it is an NP-hard problem, a variable
 neighborhoodsearchmetaheuristicisappliedtothecombinatorial
 part, while the linear continuous optimization is left to an exact
 solver, which decodes every (integer) partial solution considered
 by the metaheuristic. Uncertainty is then reproduced using
 discrete-eventsimulation,whichisintegratedinthemetaheuristic
 framework. However, the algorithm does not call simulation to
 evaluate solutions since that would require a huge computational
 effort. Furthermore, given that each solution is decoded by an
 exact method, using simulation as an evaluation function would
 only give feedback with respect to the integer representation
 (sequencing of campaigns). Therefore, simulation is used to refine
 particular parameters of the analytical model, so that the resulting
 plans can be more robust.
 6.2. Transportation and logistics
 The first example in this section refers to the vehicle routing
 problem with stochastic demands, another NP-hard problem in
 whichasetofcustomerswithrandomdemandsmustbeservedby
 afleet ofhomogeneousvehiclesdepartingfromadepot.Obviously,
 there are some tangible costs associated with the distribution of
 these resources from the depot to the customers. In particular, it
 is usual for the model to explicitly consider costs due to moving
 a vehicle from one node– customer or depot– to another. These
 costs are often related to the total distance traveled, but they can
 also include other factors such as number of vehicles employed,
 service times for each customer, etc. The classical goal consists of
 determining the optimal solution (set of routes) that minimizes
 those tangible costs subject to the following constraints: (i) all
 routes beginandendatthedepot;(ii)eachvehiclehasamaximum
 load capacity, which is considered to be the same for all vehicles;
 (iii) all (stochastic) customers’ demands must be satisfied; (iv)
 each customer is supplied by a single vehicle; and (v) a vehicle
 cannot stop twice at the same customer without incurring in a
 penalty cost. The random behavior of customers’ demands could
 cause an expected feasible solution to become infeasible if the
 final demand of anyrouteexceeds theactual vehicle capacity. This
 situation is referred to as ‘route failure’, and when it happens some
 corrective actions must be introduced to obtain a new feasible
 solution. Thus, for example, after a route failure the associated
 vehiclemightbeforcedtoreturntothedepotinordertoreloadand
 resume the distribution at the last visited customer. As discussed
 in [58], one possible methodology to deal with this problem is to
 design reliable solutions, i.e., solutions with a low probability of
 suffering route failures. This is basically attained by constructing
 routesinwhichtheassociatedexpecteddemandwillbesomewhat
 lower than the vehicle capacity. Particularly, the idea is to keep
 a certain amount of vehicle capacity surplus (safety stock) while
 designing the routes, so that if final routes’ demands exceed their
 expected values up to a certain limit, they can be satisfied without
 incurringinaroutefailure.Usingsafetystocksnotonlycontributes
 to reducing variable costs due to route failures but, related to that,
 it also increases the reliability or robustness of the planned routes,
 i.e., as safety stock levels increase, the probability of suffering a
 route failure diminishes. Notice, however, that employing safety
 stocks also increases fixed costs associated with an initial routing
 design, since more vehicles and more routes are needed when
 larger buffers are considered. Therefore, when minimizing the
 total expected cost, a tradeoff exists between fixed costs and
 expected variable costs. Thus, the challenge relies on the selection
 of the appropriate buffer size. Given a stochastic instance, Juan et
 al. [58] consider different levels of this buffer size and then solve
 the resulting scenarios. This is performed by employing Monte
 Carlo simulation, which allows for estimating the variable costs
 associated with each candidate solution. Thus, among the multiple
 solutions generated for each scenario, the ones with lowest total
 expected costs are stored as the best-found result associated
 with the corresponding safety-stock levels. Once the execution
 of the different scenarios ends, the corresponding solutions are
 comparedtoeachotherandtheonewiththelowesttotalexpected
 costs is selected as the best-found routing plan. A parallel version
 of this algorithm can be found in Juan et al. [75].
 Another simheuristic approach has been used by Goodson et
 al. [76]togeneratedynamicsolutionsfortheMulti-vehicleRouting
 ProblemwithStochastic DemandandDurationLimits.Yetanother
 example in the transportation and logistics arena is due to Juan
 et al. [61], who deal with the inventory routing problem with
 stochastic demands (also an NP-hard problem). This can be seen
 as an extension of the well-known capacitated vehicle routing
 problem composed of a set of retail centers plus the depot. Each
 retail center owns an inventory, which is managed by the central
 depot. For each retail center, the inventory level at the end of
 a period depends on the initial stock level and also on the end
clients’ demands during that period. These end-clients’ demands
 are stochastic in nature, and they can be modeled through
 theoretical or empirical probability distributions. Therefore, at the
 end of each period there might be some costs associated with
 inventory holding and inventory stock-outs. These costs might be
 incorporated into the decision-making process and added to the
 distribution or routing costs. At the end of each period, inventory
 levels are registered by the retail center and updated in the central
 depot, so that a new routing strategy is defined for the new period
 taking into account the new data. Under these conditions, one
 possible goal is to minimize total expected costs (distribution plus
 inventory-related costs) in each single-period scenario. In order
 to solve this problem, Juan et al. [61] propose a hybrid approach
 which also combines simulation with an efficient vehicle-routing
 metaheuristic. The algorithm initially makes use of Monte Carlo
 simulation to estimate the expected inventory costs associated
 with each retail center-policy combination. Next, it employs a
70
 A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 fast routing heuristic to compute the total costs– inventory plus
 routing– associated with several refill strategies. The best of
 these strategies is then utilized as an initial base solution in
 a multi-start randomized metaheuristic. After randomly sorting
 the retail centers, this heuristic iteratively improves the base
 solution by trying different refill policies for each retail center and
 selecting the one with the lowest total costs. After performing a
 set of computational tests, the authors show that their ‘integrated’
 methodology outperforms the traditional sequential approach,
 in which each individual inventory level is optimized first and
 then the resulting vehicle routing problem is solved. Notice that
 their simulation–optimizationapproachcanconsiderpersonalized
 refill policies for each customer, which contributes to significantly
 reducingthetotalcostsoverotherapproachesusingstandardrefill
 policies.
 An interesting recent approach has been announced by Dross
 and Rabe [77]. The problem initiated from a large, international
 trading company with over 100 warehouses in different countries
 and with an inventory of around 150,000 items on permanent
 stock. The company operates a large, complex and heterogeneous
 logistics network. The network is structured as a multi-echelon
 network with central, regional and local warehouses. Within the
 logistics network, there are certain warehouses that can perform
 value-added services, for example cutting, drilling or milling. In
 recent years, the company has developed specialized reporting
 systems to manage their logistics network. The process data and
 the stock data are gathered by the operational systems and are
 regularly transferred into a Data Warehouse (DWH). Based on
 the DWH, the company has developed different Performance
 Measurement Systems (PMS). PMS unite different Performance
 Measures that relate to each other in a hierarchical form and
 usually culminate in one Key Performance Indicator (KPI). The
 company also developed a dedicated KPI Monitoring System
 (KPIMS) for each KPI, to ensure constant improvement of the
 logistics network regarding the KPIs. Each KPIMS constantly
 monitors one KPI and sends an individually composed KPI Alert
 to a responsible manager, if the KPI leaves certain predefined
 corridors. A KPI Alert generally consists of two parts: A list of facts
 that caused the KPI to deteriorate and a set of possible actions
 that could be performed by the addressed manager in order to
 improve the KPI. In this setup a problem arises from the fact that
 the different KPIMS are not connected to each other and each
 KPI Alert is sent to the managers of the company, independently.
 This leads to a situation, where the suggested actions of a KPIMS
 could improve its own KPI while deteriorating one or more other
 KPIs. Furthermore, from the perspective of the receiving manager,
 the resulting counter-intuitive and counter-productive suggested
 actions could be very disappointing. E.g., the logistics manager
 could receive a report, which tells him to lower the stock of a
 specific item, because this wouldimprovehis‘‘StockProductivity’’.
 He performs the suggested action and therefore receives another
 report from another KPIMS, which tells him to raise the stock,
 because this would probably improve his ‘‘Deliveries On Time In
 Full’’. As a consequence, the manager would probably reject the
 suggested actions and just act according to his or her personal
 opinion or not react at all. Therefore, the company is looking
 for a solution to optimize their logistics network in a constant,
 multi-objective manner, i.e. to find those actions that optimize
 the network considering all monitored KPIs. Essentially, the goal
 is an interdependence analysis, which can be used to improve the
 understanding of the interconnectedness of the different KPIs and,
 most importantly, generate good integrated action suggestions
 that improve the logistics network. Unfortunately, the complexity
 of the network inhibits to reduce the problem to one of the
 traditional combinatorial problems with stochastic parameters,
 suchasforexampletheInventoryRoutingProblemwithStochastic
 Demands(IRPSD)[65].Thetailoringofaspecializedmeta-heuristic
 is prevented, because the structure of each Performance Indicator
 System is too complex to inject it effectively into a meta-heuristic.
 Therefore, Discrete Event Simulation (DES) is applied to measure
 the KPIs for different scenarios of actions and their combinations.
 The measurement of the KPIs is possible because the output data
 of the DES model is aggregated and analyzed in the same way as
 the original real-world data using DWH technology. Comparing
 the KPIs with their respective predefined corridors enables the
 system to evaluate if an action was expedient or not. The number
 of possible actions is very high and a simple permutation of
 the actions is thus not feasible. An intelligent mechanism is
 mandatorytodrivethesimulationexperimentstowardsapplicable
 solutions. A research project is running ontheimplementationofa
 simheuristic approach modeling an agent which executes actions
 on the DES model and receives rewards (KPI measurements)
 in order to learn which actions were expedient. This approach
 uses machine learning algorithms to explore the solution space,
 also taking into account knowledge from previous learning in
 comparable situations.
 6.3. Internet computing
 Our next example is related to the field of Internet comput
ing, and illustrates how discrete-event simulation can be also
 combined with metaheuristics in order to check the feasibility of
 probabilistic constraints. Internet computing systems can benefit
 from the use of personal and non-dedicated computers, which are
 currently employed in volunteer computing systems. Being non
dedicated, these resources show random behavior regarding the
 times they are online (available) and offline. Accordingly, their
 availability levels are lower than those of traditionally employed
 dedicated resources. Thus, in order to usenon-dedicatedresources
 in cloud computing environments, it is necessary first to solve
 the problem of how to attain high availability levels for the In
ternet services deployed over them. Most approaches on how to
 guarantee high service availability levels with non-dedicated re
sources are based on the introduction of high degrees of redun
dancy into the system. However, this praxis leads to an inefficient
 usage of computational resources and, therefore, to higher opera
tional costs. Accordingly,in[62],theauthorsproposeanovelsimu
lation–optimization approach to generate cost-efficient configura
tions of non-dedicated resources able to support Internet services
 with ahighavailability level, i.e., they deal with the stochastic COP
 of determining a minimum-cost configuration of non-dedicated
 resources able to support a service while maintaining the service
 availability level over a user-defined threshold. The main idea be
hind their solution approach is to design a metaheuristic algo
rithm that, starting from a feasible but costly solution, performs an
 oriented local search trying to replace expensive resources with
 cheaper ones, usually offering somewhat lower availability lev
els. For each new configuration generated in this iterative process,
 discrete-event simulation is employed, as suggested in [78], to es
timate the new global availability of the service. This estimation is
 then used to check if the new and less expensive configuration of
fers an availability level higher than the one specified by the user.
 Previously published proposals for availability-aware service
 deployment required the use of restrictive assumptions, e.g., iden
tical replicas of a service, series–parallel topologies, small-scale
 scenarios, specific probability distributions, etc. All these unrealis
tic assumptionsareunnecessaryinthenewsimheuristicapproach.
 According to the numerical experiments run by the authors, their
 algorithm is able to quickly provideoptimalsolutions in small-size
 scenarios, while it can also be used in more realistic scenarios to
 generate good solutions in real time, thus improving the greedy
 approachestypicallyusedinInternetservicedeploymentpractices
A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 71
 over contributory resources i.e., computing resources provided by
 individual Internet users who are typically distributed around the
 world. Ofcourse, improvingthegreedysolutionalsocausesproper
 resource usage, i.e., more services could be supported by the same
 number of resources or fewer resources could support the same
 number of services.
 7. Conclusions and future perspectives
 Mostofthecombinatorialoptimizationproblemsthatarefound
 in real-world applications have a stochastic nature. Since the vast
 majority of the articles in the combinatorial optimization litera
ture deal with deterministic scenarios, there is a need to consider
 simulation–optimization approaches that allow researchers and
 practitioners for solving realistic models including uncertainty.
 Simheuristics contributetofill this gapbyextendingmetaheuristic
 algorithms in a natural way, so they can also be applied in solving
 combinatorial optimization problems with stochastic components
 either in the objective function or in the set of constraints. How
ever, the concept of simheuristics described in this paper differs
 from the metaheuristics reported in the SO community [9,57]. In
stead of using a pure black box approach, where evaluations are
 performed only by simulation, simheuristics closely integrate op
timizationandsimulationbyincorporatingproblem-specificinfor
mation.Thus,analyticalexpressionscomplementtheoptimization
 process and may be used to screen poor or infeasible solutions.
 Since these analytical expressions are problem-specific, they ex
ist prior to any simulation run. Therefore, they are not as depen
dent on simulation as the metamodels used in the SO community.
 Still, they can be enhanced with the simulation feedback. Finally,
 bydesigntheyareabletoprovidedifferent alternative solutions of
 similar quality and promote the introduction of risk or reliability
 analysis criteria when comparing these solutions, so the decision
makercanchoosethesolutionthatbestfits his/her utility function
 according to these criteria. In order to control the computational
 timeinvestedinperformingsimulations,therearesomecriticalis
sues in the design of an efficient simheuristic algorithm. One issue
 is the selection policy of promising solutions—the ones that will
 be sent to the simulation component. Another issue is the number
 of replications that must be run for each of these promising solu
tions. During the stochastic searching process, simulations with a
 relatively short number of replications should be sufficient to ob
tain rough estimates of the solution value, so that a list of elite
 solutions can be constructed. Once the stochastic searching pro
cess is finished, simulations with more replications can be run in
 order to obtain more accurate estimates for each of the elite solu
tions. Alternatively, statistical selection methods can be incorpo
rated to adjust the simulation length according to the difference
 betweensolutions. Also, variance reduction techniques can beem
ployed here.
 So far, most simheuristic approaches have focused on evalua
tion function and feasibility checking purposes, and they have em
ployedeitherMonteCarloordiscrete-eventsimulation.Weexpect
 other types of simulation, such as agent-based, to be increasingly
 adopted in simheuristic frameworks. Since these simulation types
 require more computational effort, analytical model enhancement
 methods appear to be a good alternative in many situations, par
ticularly when there is a linear analytical model for the problem.
 Acknowledgments
 This workhasbeenpartially supported by the Spanish Ministry
 of Economy and Competitiveness (grant TRA2013-48180-C3-P),
 FEDER, and the Ibero-American Programme for Science and
 Technology for Development (CYTED2014-515RT0489). Likewise
 wewanttoacknowledge the support received by the Department
 of Universities, Research & Information Society of the Catalan
 Government (Grant 2014-CTP-00001) and the CAN Foundation
 (Navarre, Spain) (Grant 3CAN2014-3758).
 References
 [1] Van Hentenryck P, Bent R. Online stochastic combinatorial optimization.
 Boston. (USA): The MIT Press; 2010.
 [2] Bent R., Van Hentenryck P.. Waiting and relocation strategies in online
 stochastic vehicle routing. In: proceedings of the twentieth international joint
 conference on artificial intelligence; 2007. p. 1816–21.
 [3] Hemmelmayr V, Doerner KF, Hartl RF, Savelsbergh MWP. Vendor managed
 inventory for environments with stochastic product usage. Eur J Oper Res
 2010;202:686–95.
 [4] Bianchi L, Dorigo M, Gambardella LM, Gutjahr WJ. A survey on metaheuristics
 for stochastic combinatorial optimization. Natural Comput Internat J 2009;
 8(2):239–87.
 [5] Nance RE, Sargent RG. Perspectives on the evolution of simulation. Oper Res
 2002;50(1):161–72.
 [6] Gass SI, Assad AA. Model world: Tales from the time line- the definition of OR
 and the origins of Monte Carlo simulation. Interfaces 2005;35(5):429–35.
 [7] Kleijnen JPC, Sanchez SM, Lucas TW, Cioppe TM. State-of-the-art review: A
 user’s guide to the brave new world of designing simulation experiments.
 INFORMS J Comput2005;17(3):263–89.
 [8] Soeiro-Ferreira J. Multimethodology in metaheuristics. J Oper Res Soc 2013;
 64:873–83.
 [9] Glover F, Kelly JP, Laguna M. New advances and applications of combining
 simulation and optimization. In: Proceedings of the 1996 winter simulation
 conference. 1996. p. 144–152.
 [10] Glover F, Kelly JP, Laguna M. New advances for wedding optimization and
 simulation. Proceedings of the 1999 winter simulation conference, 1999. p.
 255–60.
 [11] April J, Glover F, Kelly JP, Laguna M. Practical introduction to simulation
 optimization. In: Proceedings of the 2003 winter simulationconference. 2003.
 p. 71–8.
 [12] Eskandari H, Mahmoodi E, Fallah H, Geiger CD. Performance analysis of
 commercial simulation-based optimization packages: OptQuest and Witness
 optimizer. In: Proceedings of the 2011 winter simulation conference. 2011. p.
 2363–73.
 [13] Rogers P. Optimum-seeking simulation in the design and control of
 manufacturing systems: experience with OptQuest for Arena. In: Proceedings
 of the 2002 winter simulation conference. 2002. p. 1143–50.
 [14] Kleijnen JPC, Wan J. Optimization of simulated systems: OptQuest and
 alternatives. Simul Modelling Practice Theor 2007;15:354–62.
 [15] Hubscher-Younger T, Mosterman PJ, Deland S, Orqueda O, Eastman D.
 Integrating discrete-event and time-based models with optimization for
 resource allocation. In: Proceedings of the 2012 winter simulation conference.
 2012. p. 145–55.
 [16] Sörensen K. Metaheuristics—the metaphor exposed. Internat Trans Oper Res
 2015;22(1):3–18.
 [17] Figueira G, Almada-Lobo B. Hybrid simulation-optimization methods: A
 taxonomy and discussion. Simul Modelling Practice Theor 2014;46:118–34.
 [18] Shanthikumar JG, Sargent RG. A unifying view of hybrid simulation/analytic
 models and modeling. Oper Res 1983;31(6):1030–52.
 [19] Swisher JR, Hyden P, Jacobson SH, Schruben L.. Simulation optimization: a
 surveyofsimulationoptimizationtechniquesandprocedures.In:Proceedings
 of the 2000 winter simulation conference. 2000. p. 119–28.
 [20] Andradottir S. An overview of simulation optimization via random search.
 Handbooks in operations research and management science, vol. 13. 2006.
 p. 617–31. Ch. 20.
 [21] Barton RR, Meckesheimer M. Metamodel-based simulation optimization.
 Handbooks in operations research and management science, vol. 13. 2006.
 p. 535–74. Ch. 18.
 [22] Fu MC. Optimization for Simulation: Theory vs. Practice. INFORMS J Comput
 2002;14(3):192–215.
 [23] Tekin E, Sabuncuoglu I. Simulation optimization: A comprehensive review on
 theory and applications. IIE Trans 2004;36(11):1067–81.
 [24] WangLF,ShiLY.Simulationoptimization:areviewontheoryandapplications.
 Acta Automat Sinica 2013;39(11):1957–68.
 [25] AprilJ,GloverF,KellyJP,LagunaM.Simulation/OptimizationusingRealWorld
 Applications. In: Proceedings of the 2001 conference on winter simulation
 conference. 2001. p. 134–38.
 [26] DengizB,AlabasC.Simulationoptimizationusingtabusearch.In:Proceedings
 of the 2000 winter simulation conference. 2000. p. 805–810.
 [27] Altiparmak F, Dengiz B, Bulgak AA. Optimization of buffer sizes in assembly
 systems using intelligent techniques. In: Proceedings of the 2002 conference
 on winter simulation conference. 2002. p. 1157–62.
 [28] Byrne MD, Hossain MM. Production planning: An improved hybrid approach.
 Internat J Production Econ 2005;93:225–9.
 [29] Bang JY, Kim YD. Hierarchical production planning for semiconductor wafer
 fabrication based on linear programming and discrete-event simulation. IEEE
 Trans Automat Sci Eng 2010;7(2):326–36.
 [30] Can B, Beham A, Heavey C. A comparative study of genetic algorithm
 components in simulation-based optimisation. In: Proceedings of the 2008
 winter simulation conference. 2007. p. 1829–37.
 [31] Angelidis E, Bohn D, Rose O. A simulation-based optimization heuristic using
 self-organization for complex assembly lines. In: Proceedings of the 2012
 conference on winter simulation conference. 2012. p. 1231–40.
72
 A.A. Juan et al. / Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015) 62–72
 [32] Laroque C, Klaas A, Fischer JH, Kuntze M. Fast converging, automated
 experiment runs for material flow simulations using distributed computing
 and combined metaheuristics. Proceedings of the 2012 winter simulation
 conference. 2012. p. 102–11.
 [33] Almeder C, Hartl RF. A metaheuristic optimization approach for a real-world
 stochasticflexibleflowshopproblemwithlimitedbuffer.InternatJProduction
 Econ 2013;145(1):88–95.
 [34] Lin JT, Huang CJ. A simulation-based optimization approach for a semicon
ductor photobay with automated material handling system. Simul Modelling
 Practice Theor 2014;46:76–100.
 [35] GanstererM,AlmederC,HartlRF.Simulation-basedoptimizationmethodsfor
 setting productionplanningparameters.InternatJProductionEcon2014;151:
 206–13.
 [36] Subramanian D, Pekny JF, Reklaitis GV. A simulation-optimization framework
 for addressing combinatorial and stochastic aspects of an R&D pipeline
 management problem. Comput Chem Eng 2000;24(2):1005–11.
 [37] Truong TH, Azadivar F. Simulation optimization in manufacturing analysis:
 simulation based optimization for supply chain configuration design. In
 Proceedings of the 35th conference on winter simulation. 2003. p. 1268–75.
 [38] Subramaniam G, Gosavi A. Simulation-based optimization for material
 dispatching in a retailer network. In: Proceedings of the 2004 winter
 simulation conference. 2004. p. 1412–17.
 [39] Jung JY, Blau G, Pekny JF, Reklaitis GV, Eversdyk D. A simulation based opti
mization approach to supply chain management under demand uncertainty.
 Comput ChemEng2004;28(10):2087–106.
 [40] Jung JY, Blau G, Pekny JF, Reklaitis GV, Eversdyk D. Integrated safety
 stock management for multi-stage supply chains under production capacity
 constraints. Comput Chem Eng 2008;32(11):2570–81.
 [41] Ekren BY, Heragu SS. Simulation based optimization of multi-location
 transshipment problem with capacitated transportation. In: Proceedings of
 the 2008 winter simulation conference. 2008. p. 2632–38.
 [42] AlmederC,PreusserM,HartlRF.Simulationandoptimizationofsupplychains:
 alternative or complementaryapproaches?.ORSpectrum2009;31(1):95–119.
 [43] Eskandari H, Darayi M, Geiger CD. Usingsimulation optimization as a decision
 support tool for supply chain coordination with contracts. In: Proceedings of
 the 2010 winter simulation conference. 2010. p. 1306–17.
 [44] AlizadehM,EskandariH,SajadifarSM,GeigerCD.Analyzingastochasticinven
tory systemfor deteriorating items with stochastic lead time using simulation
 modeling. In: proceedings of the 2011 winter simulation conference. 2011. p.
 1650–62.
 [45] Baesler FF, Sepulveda JA. Multi-response simulation optimization using
 stochastic genetic search within a goal programming framework. In:
 Proceedings of the 2000 winter simulation conference. 2000, p. 788–4.
 [46] Baesler FF, Sepulveda JA. Multi-objective simulation optimization for a cancer
 treatment center. In: Proceedings of the 2001 winter simulation conference;
 2001. p. 1405-1411.
 [47] DentonBT,RahmanAS,NelsonH,BaileyAC.Simulationofamultipleoperating
 room surgical suite. Proceedings of the 2006 winter simulation conference.
 2006. p. 414–24.
 [48] Iser JH, Denton BT, King RE. Heuristics for balancing operating room and post
anesthesia resources under uncertainty. In: Proceedings of the 2008 winter
 simulation conference. 2008. p. 1601–08.
 [49] Stanciu A, Vargas L, May J. A revenue management approach for managing
 operating room capacity. In: Proceedings of the 2010 winter simulation
 conference. 2010. p. 2444–54.
 [50] Arnaut J. Heuristics for the maximization of operating rooms utilization using
 simulation. Simulation 2010;86(8-9):573–83.
 [51] Rico F, Salari E, Centeno G. Emergency departments nurse allocation to face a
 pandemic influenza outbreak. In: Proceedings of the 2007 winter simulation
 conference. 2007. p. 1292–98.
 [52] Kasaie P, Kelton WD. Simulation optimization for allocation of epidemic
control resources. IIE Trans Healthcare Syst Eng 2013;3:78–93.
 [53] Silva PMS, Pinto LR. Emergency medical systems analysis by simulation and
 optimization. In: Proceedings of the 2010 winter simulation conference. 2010
 p. 2422–32.
 [54] Weng S, Cheng B, Kwong ST, Wang L, Chang C. Simulation optimization
 for emergency department resources allocation. In: Proceedings of the 2011
 winter simulation conference. 2011 p. 1231–38.
 [55] Kuo YH, Leung JMY, Graham CA. Simulation with data scarcity: developing a
 simulation model of a hospital emergency department. In: Proceedings of the
 2012 winter simulation conference. 2012. p. 979–90.
 [56] Kuo YH, Rado O, Lupia B, Leung JMY, Graham CA. Improving the effi
ciency of a hospital emergency department: a simulation study with in
directly imputed service time distributions. Flexible Serv Manuf J 2014;
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10696-014-9198-7.
 [57] Olafsson S. Metaheuristics. Handbook Oper Res Manag Sci 2006;13(21):
 633–54.
 [58] Juan A, Faulin J, Grasman S, Riera D, Marull J, Mendez C. Using safety stocks
 andsimulation to solve the vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands.
 Trans Res C 2011;19:751–65.
 [59] Gonzalez S, Juan A, Riera D, Elizondo M, Fonseca P. Sim-RandSHARP: A Hybrid
 Algorithm for solving the Arc Routing Problem with Stochastic Demands. In:
 Proceedings of the 2012 winter simulation conference. 2012. p. 1–11.
 [60] JuanA,Barrios B, Vallada E, Riera D, Jorba J. SIM-ESP: A simheuristic algorithm
 for solving the permutation flow-shop problem with stochastic processing
 times. Simul Modelling Practice Theor 2014;46:101–17.
 [61] Juan A, GrasmanS,CaceresJ, Bektas T. A simheuristic algorithm for the single
periodstochastic inventoryroutingproblemwithstock-outs.SimulModelling
 Practice Theor 2014;46:40–52.
 [62] CabreraG,JuanA,LazaroD,MarquesJ,ProskurniaI.Asimulation-optimization
 approach to deploy Internet services in large-scale systems with user
providedresources.SimulTransSocModelSimulInternat2014;90(6):644–59.
 [63] Grasas A, Ramalhinho H, Juan A. SimILS: A simulation-based extension of the
 iterated local search metaheuristic for stochastic combinatorial optimization.
 J Simul 2014; http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/jos.2014.25. [in press].
 [64] Juan A, Faulin J, Ruiz R, Barrios B, Gilibert M, Vilajosana X. Using oriented
 random search to provide a set of alternative solutions to the capacitated
 vehicle routing problem. Operations research and cyber-infrastructure, 47.
 NewYork(USA): Springer; 2009. p. 331–46.
 [65] Juan AA, Rabe M. Combining simulation with heuristics to solve stochastic
 routing and scheduling problems. In: Simulation in produktion und logistik.
 Paderborn: Heinz-Nixdorf-Institute; 2013. p. 641–9.
 [66] Gurkan G, YoncaOzge A, Robinson SM. Sample-path optimization in simu
lation. In Proceedings of the 1994 winter simulation conference. 1994. p.
 247–54.
 [67] Kleywegt AJ, Shapiro A, Homem-de-Mello T. The sample average approxima
tion method for stochastic discrete optimization. SIAM J Optim 2002;12(2):
 479–502.
 [68] Figueira G, Furlan M, Almada-Lobo B. Predictive Production Planning in an
 Integrated Pulp and Paper Mill. Manufacturing Modell Manag Control 2013;
 7(1):371–6.
 [69] DodinB.Determiningtheoptimalsequencesandthedistributionalproperties
 of their completion times in stochastic flow shops. Comput Oper Res1996;23:
 829–43.
 [70] Honkomp SJ, Mockus L, Reklaitis GV. Robust scheduling with processing time
 uncertainty. Computers and Chemical Engineering 1997;21:1055–60.
 [71] Gourgand M, Grangeon N, Norre S. Markovian analysis for performance
 evaluation and scheduling in m machine stochastic flow-shop with buffers of
 any capacity. Eur J Oper Res 2008;161:126–47.
 [72] BakerKR,AltheimerD.Heuristicsolutionmethodsforthestochasticflowshop
 problem. Eur J Oper Res 2012;216:172–7.
 [73] Rabe M, Spieckermann S, Wenzel S. Verification and validation for simulation
 in production and logistics. Simulation News Europe 2010;19(2):21–9.
 [74] Rabe M, Deininger M. Modellefür Job-Shop-Scheduling-Algorithmen in
 Changing-Steady-State-Systemen.Submittedforthe15thASIMconferenceon
 simulation in production and logistics, 2013.
 [75] Juan A, Faulin J, Jorba J, Caceres J, Marques JM. Using parallel & distributed
 computing for solving real-time vehicle routing problems with stochastic
 demands. Ann Oper Res 2013;207:43–65.
 [76] Goodson JC, Ohlmann JW, Thomas BW. Rollout policies for dynamic solutions
 to the multivehicle routing problem with stochastic demand and duration
 limits. Oper Res 2013;61(1):138–54.
 [77] Dross F, Rabe M. A SimHeuristic Framework as a Decision Support System
 for Large Logistics Networks with Complex KPIs. In: Proceedings of the 22nd
 symposium simulationstechnik. 2014. p. 247–54.
 [78] Faulin, Juan JA, Serrat C, Bargueño V. Predicting availability functions in time
dependent complex systems with SAEDES simulation algorithms. Reliab Eng
 Syst Safety 2008;93(11):1761–71.