Cloud Computing: An Overview 
Ling Qian, Zhiguo Luo, Yujian Du, and Leitao Guo 
53A, Xibianmennei Ave, Xuanwu District, Beijing 100053, China 
{qianling,luozhiguo,duyujian,guoleitao}@chinamobile.com 
Abstract. In order to support the maximum number of user and elastic service 
with the minimum resource, the Internet service provider invented the cloud 
computing. within a few years, emerging cloud computing has became the hot
test technology. From the publication of core papers by Google since 2003 to 
the commercialization of Amazon EC2 in 2006, and to the service offering of 
AT&T Synaptic Hosting, the cloud computing has been evolved from internal 
IT system to public service, from cost-saving tools to revenue generator, and 
from ISP to telecom. This paper introduces the concept, history, pros and cons 
of cloud computing as well as the value chain and standardization effort. 
Keywords: Cloud computing, Cloud Storage, Virtualization. 
1   Definitions of Cloud Computing 
Similar to e-commerce, cloud computing is one of the most vague technique termi
nologies in history. One reason is that cloud computing can be used in many applica
tion scenarios, the other reason is that cloud computing are hyped by lots of compa
nies for business promotion. From the Hyper Cycle published by Gartner Group in 
2008, we can see that the cloud computing is in the phase of fast growing. 
Fig. 1. Cloud computing is in the phase of fast growing 
M.G. Jaatun, G. Zhao, and C. Rong (Eds.): CloudCom 2009, LNCS 5931, pp. 626–631, 2009. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 
Cloud Computing: An Overview 
627 
In the MIT Centennial talk in 1961, John McCarthy said that “… The computer 
utility could become the basis of a new and important industry”, which implied the 
underlying concepts of cloud computing. However the “cloud computing” as a whole 
is probably first introduced by Eric Schmidt in his talk on Search Engine Strategies 
Conferences in 2006[15]. 
Now there are lots of definitions and metaphors of cloud computing. From our 
points of view, cloud computing is a kind of computing technique where IT services 
are provided by massive low-cost computing units connected by IP networks. Cloud 
computing is rooted in search engine platform design. There are 5 major technical 
characteristics of cloud computing: (1) large scale computing resources (2) high scal
ability & elastic (3)shared resource pool (virtualized and physical resource) 
(4)dynamic resource scheduling and  (5) general purpose.  
2   History and Status 
With the explosion of the Internet, tight pressure is put to the existing storage and 
computing facilities. The Internet service providers start to use the cheap commodity 
PCs as the underlying hardware platform. Various kinds of software technologies are 
invented to make these PCs work elastically, which has led to 3 major cloud comput
ing styles based on the underlying resource abstraction technologies: the Amazon 
style, Google Style and Microsoft style.  
Amazon’s cloud computing is based on server virtualization technology. 
Amazon released Xen-based Elastic Compute Cloud™ (EC2), object stor
age service (S3) and structure data storage service (SimpleDB)[12] during 
the 2006 – 2007, under the name Amazon Web Service™ (AWS)[9]. On
demand and cheaper AWS becomes the pioneer of Infrastructure as a Ser
vice (IaaS) provider.  
Google’s style is based on technique-specific sandbox. Google published 
several research papers from 2003 to 2006[1-5], which outline a kind of 
Platform as a Service (PaaS) cloud computing. The platform, which is 
called Google App Engine™ (GAE), is released to public as a service in 
2008.  
Microsoft Azure™ [10] is released in Oct. 2008, which uses Windows Az
ure Hypervisor (WAH) as the underlying cloud infrastructure and .NET as 
the application container. Azure also offers services including BLOB ob
ject storage and SQL service. 
It’s hard to judge which one is better, but apparently server virtualization is more 
flexible and compatible with existing software and applications; while the sandboxes 
put more restrictions on programming languages but less abstraction overhead. Cur
rently, server virtualization is the most popular resource abstraction technique in 
cloud computing. 
Except these public cloud services, lots of companies has experimented and/or im
plemented internal cloud computing systems. Cloud computing is already key strategy 
for IT vendors, ISP and telecom service providers. Even further, United States of 
America and Japan have made cloud computing the national strategy. The following 
table lists some of the adopters for each style. 
628 L. Qian et al. 
 
Table 1. Three major cloud computing styles and their adopters, based on the resource abstrac
tion techniques 
Resource Abstraction Tech. Adopters 
Server Virtualization 
(Amazon Style) 
Amazon EC2 (Xen), GoGrid (Xen), 21vianet 
CloudEx (Xen), RackSpace Mosso (Xen), 
Joyent (Accelerator), AT&T Synaptic 
(Vmware), Verizon CaaS (Vmware) 
Technique-specific sandbox 
(Google Style) 
GAE (Python & JVM), Heroku (Ruby), 
Morph Application Platform(Ruby) 
Server Virtualization & Technique
specific sandbox  (Microsoft Style) 
Microsoft Azure (WAH & .NET) 
3   Cloud Computing Architecture 
Many organizations and researchers have defined the architecture for cloud comput
ing. Basically the whole system can be divided into the core stack and the manage
ment. In the core stack, there are three layers: (1) Resource (2) Platform and (3) Ap
plication. The resource layer is the infrastructure layer which is composed of physical 
and virtualized computing, storage and networking resources. 
The platform layer is the most complex part which could be divided into many sub
layers. E.g. a computing framework manages the transaction dispatching and/or task 
scheduling. A storage sub-layer provides unlimited storage and caching capability. 
The application server and other components support the same general application 
logic as before with either on-demand capability or flexible management, such that no 
components will be the bottle neck of the whole system. 
Physical Resource
 Virtualized Resource
 Application
 Browsing
 OA & M
 Server Storage Network
 Interactive
 Deployment
 Scheduling
 Performance
 Monitor
 Fault & logging
 Billing
 Configuration
 Transactional Analytical …
 Application Capability Components
 Server 
Virtualization
 WebServer AppServer Reporting ESB …
 Cache MsqQ Database DW
 Computing Frameworks
 Analytical/Scheduling Transactional/Dispatching …
 Storage 
Virtualization
 Network
 Virtualization
 …
 Platform App. Resource
 
Fig. 2. The Reference architecture 
Cloud Computing: An Overview 
629 
Based on the underlying resource and components, the application could support 
large and distributed transactions and management of huge volume of data. All the 
layers provide external service through web service or other open interfaces. 
4   Cloud Computing Categories 
There are diverse dimensions to classify cloud computing, two commonly used cate
gories are: service boundary and service type. 
* From the service boundary’s view, cloud computing can be classified as public 
cloud, private cloud and hybrid cloud. The public cloud refers to services provided to 
external parties. The enterprises build and operate private cloud for themselves. Hy
brid cloud shares resources between public cloud and private cloud by a secure net
work. Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) services released by Google[8] and Amazon[9] 
are examples of Hybrid cloud. 
* From the service type’s view, cloud computing can be classified as Infrastructure 
as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Software as a Service (SaaS). 
SaaS provide services to end users, while IaaS and PaaS provide services to ISV and 
developers - leaving a margin for 3-party application developers. 
5   Advantages and Risks 
The cloud computing is a Win-Win strategy for the service provider and the service 
consumer. We summarize the advantages as below: 
Satisfy business requirements on demand by resizing the resource occu
pied by application to fulfill the changing the customer requirements.  
Lower cost and energy-saving. By making use of low cost PC, customer
ized low power consuming hardware and server virtualization, both 
CAPEX and OPEX are decreased. 
Improve the efficiency of resource management through dynamic re
source scheduling. 
However there are also some major challenges to be studied. 
Privacy and security. Customer has concerns on their privacy and data se
curity than traditional hosting service. 
The continuity of service. It refers to the factors that may negatively af
fected the continuity of cloud computing such as Internet problems, power 
cut-off, service disruption and system bugs.  Followed are some typical 
cases of such problems: In November 2007, RackSpace, Amazon’s com
petitor, stopped its service for 3 hours because of power cut-off at its data 
center; in June 2008, Google App Engine service broke off for 6 hours due 
to some bugs of storage system; In March 2009, Microsoft Azure experi
enced 22 hours’ out of service caused by OS system update. Currently, the 
public cloud provider based on virtualization, defines the reliability of ser
vice as 99.9% in SLA. 
Service migration. Currently, no regularity organization have reached the 
agreement on the standardization of cloud computing’s external interface. 
630 
L. Qian et al. 
As a result, once a customer started to use the service of a cloud computing 
provider, he is most likely to be locked by the provider, which lay the cus
tomer in unfavorable conditions. 
6   Value Chain of Cloud Computing 
The following figure depicts the cloud computing value chain with related organiza
tions and their functionalities. 
Fig. 3. The trunk and supporting value chain of cloud computing 
Cloud Applications: The driven force of cloud computing, which is different 
from traditional application module. 
Cloud Application Operator: Offers cloud computing products. In many cases, 
they are same as by application provider or platform provider. 
Cloud Application Platform Operator: Provides cloud application and develop
ment platform, such as GAE™ and Force.com™, etc. 
Cloud infrastructure operator: Provide infrastructure service, such as AWS™ 
and GoGrid. 
Network Operator: Provide network access service to the above platform opera
tors and the end users. 
Technique supporting vendor: Offer technical support to players in this chain, 
including software development, testing, provisioning and operation. 
Terminal equipment vendor: Offer device maintenance service for all players in 
the chain. 
End Users: End users pays for the cloud services. 
7   Standardization 
Distributed Management Task Force[7] is an industry alliance composed by over 200 
IT related corporations including IBM, EMC, HP, Cisco, Oracle and Microsoft, which 
is committed to develop, maintain and popularize the IT management system under 
enterprise context. DMTF has published Virtualization Management Initiative and 
Open Virtualization Format, and the latter is declared to be supported by major ven
dors. DMFT founded Open Cloud Standards Incubator at the year 2009, whose aim is 
to clarify the interoperability between several cloud systems. 
Cloud Computing: An Overview 
631 
OGF (Open Grid Forum) has started some work to discuss cloud computing related 
standards, which is a standardization organization like IETF aiming at promoting the 
standardization and best practice of distribute computing related techniques. CCI-WG 
(Open Cloud Computing Interface Working Group) is established to design resource 
management API for IaaS cloud services by OGF. Some cloud computing service 
providers like ElasticHosts, GoGrid, and FlexiScale have announced to adhere this 
API in the later developments. 
Besides, SNIA (Storage Network Industry Association), CSA (Cloud Security Alli
ance) and OCC (Open Cloud Consortium) is now working on cloud storage, cloud 
security and cloud intercommunication standards respectively. In order to coordinate 
the work of above standardization organizations, OMG (Object Management Group) 
appealed that all the organizations maintain their own standards on http://cloud
standards.org. 
PaaS and SaaS don’t have related cloud computing standards yet. Most current 
systems exploit mature protocols and have variety kinds of service forms. 
References 
[1] Ghemawat, S., Gobioff, H., Leung, S.-T.: The Google File System. In: SOSP (2003) 
[2] Dean, J., Ghemawat, S.: MapReduce: Simplifed Data Processing on Large Clusters. In: 
OSDI 2004 (2004) 
[3] Chang, F., Dean, J., Ghemawat, S., et al.: Bigtable: A Distributed Storage System for 
Structured Data. In: OSDI 2006 (2006) 
[4] Burrows, M.: The Chubby lock service for loosely-coupled distributed systems. In: OSDI 
2006 (2006) 
[5] Pike, R., Dorward, S., Griesemer, R., Quinlan, S.: Interpreting the Data: Parallel Analysis 
with Sawzall. Scientific Programming (2005) 
[6] Open Cloud Computing Interface, http://www.occi-wg.org/doku.php 
[7] Distributed Management Task Force, http://www.dmtf.org  
[8] Google App Engine, http://appengine.google.com  
[9] Amazon Web Service, http://aws.amazon.com  
[10] Microsoft Azure, http://www.microsoft.com/azure/  
[11] DeCandia, G., Hastorun, D., Jampani, M., et al.: Dynamo: Amazon’s Highly Available 
Key-value Store. In: SOSP 2007 (October 2007) 
[12] Schmidt, E.: Conversation with Eric Schmidt hosted by Danny Sullivan. In: Search En
gine Strategies Conference (August 2006)