Fixed-Parameter Tractability and Parameterized Complexity,
 Applied to Problems From Computational Social Choice
 —Mathematical Programming Glossary Supplement —
 Claudia Lindner and J¨org Rothe
 Institut f¨ur Informatik
 Heinrich-Heine-Universit¨ at D¨usseldorf
 40225 D¨usseldorf, Germany
 October 17, 2008
 Abstract
 This supplement provides a brief introduction to the field of fixed-parameter tractability
 and parameterized complexity. Some basic notions are explained and some related results are
 presented, with a focus on problems arising in the field of computational social choice.
 1 Fixed-Parameter Tractability and Parameterized Complexity
 The study of fixed-parameter tractability and parameterized complexity has emerged as a new field
 within computational complexity theory in the late 1980s and the early 1990s. Since the early
 pioneering work of Downey, Fellows, and other researchers this area has established plenty of
 results, notions, and methods, and it provides a useful framework for dealing in practice with
 problems considered intractable by classical complexity theory. This supplement gives only a
 rough sketch of some basic notions and techniques within parameterized complexity theory; for
 a deeper and more comprehensive treatise, the textbooks by Downey and Fellows [DF99], Flum
 and Grohe [FG06], and Niedermeier [Nie06] and the survey by Buss and Islam [BI08] are highly
 recommendable.
 Let P and NP, respectively, denote the classical (worst-case) complexity classes deterministic
 polynomial time and nondeterministic polynomial time. Given any two decision problems, A and B,
 we say A polynomial-time many-one reduces to B (denoted A
 computable function f such that, for each input x, x
 p
 m B) if there is a polynomial-time
 Aifand only if f
 be NP-hard if for each NP set A, A
 p
 m B. If B
 x B. Aset Bis said to
 NPisNP-hard then B is said to be NP-complete.
 Supported in part by the DFG under grants RO 1202/12-1 (within the European Science Foundation’s EUROCORES
 program LogICCC: “Computational Foundations of Social Choice”) and RO 1202/11-1 and by the Alexander von
 Humboldt Foundation’s TransCoop program.
 1
Traditionally, NP-hardness is used to formally capture the notion of intractability of problems
 in classical complexity theory (see, e.g., [Pap94, Rot05] for an introduction to computational
 complexity and, more specifically, Garey and Johnson [GJ79] for the theory of NP-completeness).
 Let us consider three examples of standard NP-complete problems: INDEPENDENT SET,
 DOMINATING SET, and SATISFIABILITY. The INDEPENDENT SET problem asks, given an
 undirected, simple graph G V
 E and a positive integer k, does there exist an independent set
 of size at least k in G, i.e., does there exist a subset I Vsuchthat I kandnotwovertices in I
 are adjacent? The problem DOMINATING SET asks, given an undirected, simple graph G
 E
 and a positive integer k, does there exist a dominating set of size at most k in G, i.e., does there exist
 a subset D
 V
 Vsuch that D kandevery vertex in V either belongs to D or is adjacent to some
 vertex in D? Independent sets and dominating sets can be illustrated as the result of a database
 query. Consider a database that lists the top 100 math books and the corresponding authors, and
 consider a graph G whose vertices are these authors, where any two authors are connected by an
 edge if and only if they have coauthored some of these books. Every subset of the authors such
 that no two of them have jointly written a book so far is an independent set of G. On the other
 hand, every subset D of the authors such that each author not in D has written at least one joint
 book with one of the authors in D is a dominating set. Graph-theoretic notions such as independent
 sets and dominating sets arise in many application areas. For example, dominating set is a central
 notion in computer networks or communication networks (see, e.g., Riege and Rothe [RR06] for
 more details). Finally, the SATISFIABILITY problem (SAT, for short) from propositional logic asks,
 given a boolean formula ϕ, is ϕ satisfiable, i.e., does there exist an assignment of truth values to ϕ’s
 variables that makes ϕ true? As a simple example weconsider the formulas ϕ1
 and ϕ2
 x1
 x1 x2
 x1
 x2
 x1. Apparently, ϕ1 is satisfiable by setting, say, x1 to true and x2 to false, whereas ϕ2
 is not satisfiable at all, i.e., there is no assignment of truth values that makes ϕ2 true.
 INDEPENDENT SET, DOMINATING SET, and SAT are well known to be NP-complete [GJ79],
 and thus they cannot be solved in polynomial time (unless P
 NP). Although NP-completeness
 is often taken as evidence that the problem considered is intractable, in practical applications
 we are usually interested in solving it for certain small parameters. Parameterized complexity
 theory measures a problem’s complexity based on different parts of the input, whereas traditional
 complexity theory defines complexity measures only in terms of input size. In this sense,
 parameterized complexity might be seen as some kind of “higher-dimensional” complexity theory.
 In particular, fixed-parameter tractability takes advantage of the fact that problem instances
 constitute more than simply strings of certain sizes, but rather have a structure and contain
 parameters that represent diverse aspects of the problem at hand. For fixed-parameter tractability
 to be a reasonable concept, it is crucial that the chosen parameter is expected to be small. In this
 context, “parameter” stands for an intrinsic value rather than for a value used for getting control
 over an algorithm’s behavior as is common in other disciplines, such as programming. For example,
 let us look at the complexity of database queries. Evaluating even basic conjunctive queries is NP
complete when measuring the complexity based on the size of the database plus the size of the query.
 However, since query sizes tend to be significantly smaller than the size of the entire database, the
 query size is a natural parametrization for the database query evaluation problem. Note that this
 parameter cannot be controlled explicitly, as it is determined by the query itself.
 Formally, a parameterized problem (over some alphabet Σ) is a pair Π
 2
 κ, where κ : Σ
isapolynomial-timecomputableparametrizationandΠ Σ isasetofstringsoverΣ.However,
 iftheparameterk κx isclearfromcontext,wewilldenotetheparameterizedproblemΠκ
 simplybyΠ.Forexample,anaturalparametrizationforSATisdefinedby
 κϕ numberofvariablesofϕ ifϕencodesabooleanformulawithatleastonevariable
 1 otherwise,
 andthough theresultingparameterizedversionofSATis SATκ,wewill simplydenote this
 problembySATwhentheparameterk κϕ isclear.
 Inparameterizedcomplexity theory, aproblemparameterizedbysomevaluek issaidtobe
 fixed-parameter tractable(or tobelongtotheclassFPT) if foreachfixedvalueofk there isan
 algorithmthat solves thisproblemfor instancesof sizenintime f k nO1 ,where f issome
 computablefunction. Inotherwords, theseeminglyunavoidablecombinatorial explosioninNP
hardproblemsisthenconfinedtotheparameter. Forexample, theparameterizedversionofSAT
 definedabove isfixed-parameter tractableviatheobviousbrute-forcealgorithmthatdecides the
 satisfiabilityofagivenbooleanformulawithkvariables, encodedasastringofsizem, intime
 O2k m.Accordingly,bymeansofparameterizingtheSATproblem, itcanbesolvedefficiently,
 assumingthat thechosenparameterk(thenumberofvariablesof thegivenbooleanformula)can
 beexpectedtobesmall.
 Let Πκ and Πκ betwogivenparameterizedproblems.Aparameterizedreductionfrom
 Πκ to Πκ isamapping that transformsanyprobleminstance xk intime f k xO1
 (where f isacomputable function) intoaprobleminstance x k suchthat (a) xk isayes
instanceof Πκ ifandonlyif x k isayes-instanceof Πκ ,and(b)k κ x dependsonly
 onk κx butnoton x.Fornotationalconvencience,wheneverwespeakofareductionbetween
 twoparameterizedproblemswemeanaparameterizedreduction,andwheneverwewespeakofa
 reductionbetweentwoclassicaldecisionproblemswemeana p
 m-reduction.
 The theoryof fixed-parameter intractability dealswith those problems forwhichnoFPT
 algorithmshavebeendiscoveredyet,andthusmightbehardtosolveevenifthechosenparameter
 isafixedsmallconstant.TheW-hierarchyhasbeenintroducedtoclassifytheseproblemsaccording
 totheirfixed-parameterhardness. Therearetwomainapproaches thatcanbetakentodefinethe
 W-hierarchyanditsclasses. Theoriginal definition, proposedbyDowneyandFellows [DF99],
 characterizes fixed-parameter intractable problems in terms ofweighted satisfiabilityproblems
 on classes of circuits. More recently, Flumet al. [CF03, CFG03] defined the classesWt
 byusingnondeterministic algorithms runningonrestrictedrandom-accessmachines. However,
 bothdefinitions are technically verycomplex andbeyond the scope of this supplement. For
 amore detailed definition of the entireW-hierarchy and ofW2 in particular, we refer to
 [DF99,FG06,Nie06]andthesurveybyBussandIslam[BI08].Notethat ifaproblemΠbelongs
 toPthentheparameterizedproblemΠκ isinFPTforeveryparametrizationκ.Notealsothat
 FPT W1 W2 W3
 Natural parametrizations for INDEPENDENT SET andDOMINATING SET are the positive
 integers k that are givenas the second component of the instance in the problemdefinitions
 as bounds on the size of, respectively, an independent set and a dominating set. It is
 3
widely believed that neither of the corresponding parameterized versions of INDEPENDENT SET
 and DOMINATING SET is fixed-parameter tractable (see, e.g., [DF99, FG06]). Define the
 (parameterized) problem INDEPENDENT DOMINATING SET (with parameter k) as follows: Given
 an undirected, simple graph G V
 E and a positive integer k, does there exist an independent
 dominating set of size k? Downey and Fellows [DF99] proved that both DOMINATING SET and
 INDEPENDENT DOMINATING SET are complete for the parameterized complexity class W ,1
 which is widely viewed as strong evidence that these problems are not fixed-parameter tractable.
 The INDEPENDENT SET problem with the above-mentioned parametrization is in W
 2
 1.
 Regarding the evaluation of database queries, denoting the input size (i.e., the size of the
 database) by n and the parameter (i.e., the size of the query) by k, the conjunctive query evaluation
 problem can be solved in timeOnk
 1
 ,which isstill prohibitive even for small values of k (unless only
 extremely short queries, such as queries of size two or three, were allowed).2 The conjunctive query
 evaluation problem is suspected to be not fixed-parameter tractable, as it is proven to be complete
 for W (see Flum and Grohe [FG06]). Nonetheless, the fixed-parameter intractability of the query
 evaluation problem is a strong result, since it shows that the evaluation of database queries is hard
 even for quite small queries.
 2 FPTResults for Kemeny Elections
 2.1 KemenyElections
 Voting systems have been intensely studied within computational social choice, an interesting field
 currently emerging at the interface of computer science and social choice theory. While voting was
 previously investigated in such areas as political science, economics, operations research, and social
 choice theory, a wide range of applications in computer science has been found recently. To give
 just a few examples, voting can play a central role in planning [ER93], similarity search [FKS03],
 in the design of recommender systems [GMHS99] or ranking algorithms [DKNS01], and in other
 f
 ields that require methods for preference aggregation and collective decision-making to be applied
 in, e.g., multiagent systems within distributed artificial intelligence.
 For example, Dwork et al. [DKNS01] designed a ranking algorithm with the purpose of
 lessening the spam in meta-search web-page rankings. In this scenario, web pages are viewed
 as candidates (or alternatives) and search engines are viewed as voters. Each voter provides a linear
 ranking of the candidates (with respect to some search query). Voting systems can then be used to
 aggregate the voters’ individual rankings to obtain a “consensus ranking” of a meta-search engine
 that is as “close” as possible to the given individual rankings. The voting system used by Dwork
 et al. [DKNS01] for this purpose is Kemeny’s voting system [Kem59, KS60], for this is the unique
 voting system that is “neutral, consistent, and Condorcet” (see [DKNS01, HSV05]). However, even
 determining the winners of a given Kemeny election is a difficult computational task (as will be
 1Completeness and hardness of a problem for a parameterized complexity class such as W2 is defined with respect
 to parameterized reductions.
 2“Prohibitive” here refers to a practical point of view. Of course, technically speaking, O
 whenever k is a fixed constant.
 4
 nk is polynomial time
explainedinmoredetailbelow),whichiswhyDworketal.[DKNS01]designedaheuristiccalled
 “localKemenization”onwhichtheirrankingalgorithmisbased.
 AnelectionE CV isgivenbyasetCofcandidatesandasetVofvoters.Avoteistypically
 input asapreference list over thecandidates inC, i.e., asa linearordering (or apermutation)
 of thecandidates.3 AlthoughKemenyinhisoriginalpaper[Kem59]alsoallowedtiestooccur in
 individualpreferencerankings,thereisnoconsensusintheliteratureaboutthisquestion.Forclarity
 andnotationalconvenience,wewillusetheterm“permutation”toindicatethattiesarenotallowed,
 andwewillusetheterm“preferenceranking”whentiesareallowed.
 Anelectionsystem(equivalently,avotingsystem)E isarulethattellsushowtodeterminethe
 winnersofanelection. Formally, anelectionsystemisamappingfromelectionsE CV to
 subsetsofC. Inthissection,weintroduceKemeny’selectionsystem.LateroninSection3,weare
 concernedwiththeelectionsystemsbyCondorcet,Dodgson,Young,andCopelandaswellasthe
 plurality-ruleelectionsystem.
 Kemeny’s system, with ties in individual preference rankings explicitly allowed [Kem59,
 KS60],worksasfollows. LetE CV beagivenelection. Todefine“closeness”betweenany
 twopreferencerankingsrandsonC,thefollowingdistancemeasureisused:
 dist rs ∑
 cd
 Drs cd
 wherethesumistakenoverallunorderedpairs cd ofcandidatesinCand
 Drs cd
 0 ifrandsagreeoncandd
 1 ifoneofrandsprefersctodordtocand
 theotheroneisindifferentwithrespecttocandd
 2 ifrandsstrictlydisagreeoncandd.
 TheKemenyscoreofagivenpreferencerankingronCisdefinedasKScoreE r ∑v Vdist rv .
 For eachcandidate c C, defineKemenyScoreE c minrKScoreE r ,where theminimumis
 takenoverallpreferencerankingsronCsuchthatnocandidate isrankedhigher thancinr. A
 preferencerankingsonCsuchthatKScoreE s isminimumissaidtobeaKemenyconsensusof
 E,andaKemenywinnerofEiseverycandidatethatisrankedontopofaKemenyconsensusofE.
 LetKemenyScoreEdenote theKemenyscoreofaKemenyconsensusofE. NotethataKemeny
 consensusofE CV isnotnecessarilyanelementofV.
 ThedecisionproblemKEMENYSCOREisdefinedasfollows:GivenanelectionE CV and
 apositiveintegerk,isittruethatKemenyScoreE k?ThedecisionproblemKEMENYWINNERis
 definedasfollows:GivenanelectionE CV andadistinguishedcandidatec C,doesthere
 existaKemenyconsensusofEinwhichnocandidate isrankedhigher thanc(i.e., isit truethat
 KemenyScoreE c KemenyScoreE d foreachd C)?
 Example2.1ConsidertheelectionE CV withthreecandidatesandfourvotersthat isgiven
 bycandidatesetC bcd andvotersetV v1 v2 v3 v4 ,wherethepreferencerankingsof
 3By“linearordering”weheremeanatie-free(i.e.,strict)linearordering.
 5
thevotersare
 v1: b c d
 v2: c b d
 v3: b c d
 v4: b c d
 Notethatinthiscasetherankingsofv1andv4areidentical,soVcanalsobeseenasamultisetof
 votes.
 TocomputetheKemenyconsensusofEandtodetermineE’sKemenywinners,wehavetofind
 theminimumKScoreE r ,wheretheminimumistakenoverthe13possiblepreferencerankingsr
 onC(withtiesallowed).Table1showshowtoobtainthevalueKScoreE r foreachsuchr.
 rankingr dist rv1 dist rv2 dist rv3 dist rv4 KScoreE r
 b c d 2 2 3 2 9
 b c d 0 2 1 0 3
 b c d 2 4 1 2 9
 b c d 1 3 1 1 6
 b d c 4 4 3 4 15
 b d c 3 5 2 3 13
 c b d 2 0 3 2 7
 c b d 1 1 2 1 5
 c d b 4 2 5 4 15
 c d b 3 1 4 3 11
 d b c 4 4 5 4 17
 d b c 5 5 4 5 19
 d c b 4 3 6 4 17
 Table1:DeterminingKScoreE r foreachpreferencerankingronC
 Forexample, thefirstrowofTable1isobtainedasfollows:
 KScoreE b c d ∑
 vi V
 dist b c dvi
 ∑
 vi V
 Db c dvi
 bc Db c dvi
 bd Db c dvi
 cd
 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1
 2 2 3 2 9
 Obviously,KScoreE b c d 3istheminimumvalue,sob c distheKemenyconsensus,
 andsincebothbandcarethemostpreferredcandidatesinthisKemenyconsensus, theybothare
 KemenywinnersofE. Ingeneral, aKemenyconsensusneednotbeuniqueandneednotbean
 elementofV(whichbothhappenstobethecaseinthisexample).
 Bartholdi, Tovey, andTrick [BTT89b] proved that KEMENYSCORE isNP-complete and
 thatKEMENYWINNER isNP-hard. Hemaspaandra, Spakowski, andVogel [HSV05]precisely
 6
pinpointedthecomplexityof thelatterproblembyshowingitcompletefor thecomplexityclass
 PNP,theclassofsetssolvableviaapolynomial-timealgorithmwithparallelaccesstoanNPoracle.
 Notethat thesecomplexityresultsholdregardlessofwhetherornot tiesareallowedinindividual
 preferencerankings(see[HSV05]).
 2.2 Fixed-ParameterTractabilityforComputingKemenyScores
 Betzleretal.[BFG 08]studiedtheproblemofcomputingKemenyscoresfromthepointofviewof
 parameterizedcomplexity. Incontrastwiththeabove-mentionedNP-hardnessresults, theyshowed
 thatcomputingaKemenyscoreisfixed-parametertractable.Again,theirresultsrefertobothcases,
 withandwithouttiesallowedinindividualpreferencerankings.
 Forsimplicity,wefocusonthecaseinwhichtiesarenotallowed. So, insteadofpreference
 rankings,wenowconsiderpermutationsofthecandidatesetC.Then,foranytwopermutationsρ
 andσonC, thedistancemeasureisdefinedasdistρσ ∑cd KTρσ cd ,wherethesumis
 againtakenoverallunorderedpairs cd ofcandidatesinCandtheso-calledKendall-Taudistance
 (a.k.a. thenumberofinversionsbetweentwopermutations) isdefinedasKTρσ cd 0ifρand
 σrankcandd inthesameorder, andKTρσ cd 1otherwise. Allothernotionsaredefined
 analogouslywiththenotionsdefinedinSection2.1.
 Throughout thispaper, forallelectionsE CV ,m C denotesthenumberofcandidates
 andn V denotesthenumberofvoters. Tohighlight themeaningof“parameter”inthecontext
 of parameterizedcomplexityasopposed to its traditionalmeaning inother disciplines suchas
 mathematicalprogramming,weconsidertwoparametrizationsbelow: thenumbermofcandidates
 and themaximumKendall-Taudistanceδ(tobedefinedbelow)betweenany twovotes in the
 givenelection.Whilethenumbermofcandidatesinagivenelectionisimmediatelyclearfromthe
 probleminstance,δis“intrinsic”totheelection.However, recall that it isenoughthatafunction
 κ:Σ ispolynomial-timecomputable for it tobeaparametrization inour sense. Indeed,
 notethat theKendall-TaudistancecanbecomputedintimeOmlogm byadivide-and-conquer
 algorithm.
 2.2.1 FirstParametrization:NumberofCandidates
 Betzleretal.[BFG 08]provedthefollowingresult,whichsaysthatwhenthenumberofcandidates
 isafixedconstant,Kemenyscorescanbecomputedinpolynomial time.Notethatinmost(though
 notall)scenariosinvolvingelections,assumingthatthenumberofcandidatesisboundedbyasmall
 constantisareasonableassumption;4 itthusmakessensetoconsidertheparameterizedcomplexity
 ofcomputingKemenyscoreswiththenumberofcandidatesastheparameter.
 Theorem2.2([BFG08])KEMENYSCOREcanbesolvedintimeO2mm2 n .
 LetussketchtheproofofTheorem2.2.GivenanelectionE CV andapositiveintegerk
 asinput, thealgorithmworksasfollows.ForeachsubsetB C, theKemenyscoreoftheelection
 4AnexceptionisthescenariogiveninSection2.1,wherewebpagesareviewedascandidatesandsearchenginesare
 viewedasvoters.Clearly,inthisscenarioitismorereasonabletoassumethatthenumberofcandidatesishuge,whereas
 thenumberofvotersissmall.
 7
EB BVB ,whereVBdenotes therestrictionof thevoter setV tothecandidates inB, is tobe
 computedrecursively.TherecurrenceusedforagivensubsetBistoconsidereverysubsetB c
 ofBwithonecandidatedeleted. ForeachB Candforeachc B, letπB c beaKemeny
 consensusofelection B c VB c .LetπBbethepermutationobtainedfromπB c byputting
 cintopposition.ComputeK minB CKScoreEB
 πB ,wheretheminimumistakenoverallsubsets
 BofC.Output“yes”ifK k,andoutput“no”otherwise.
 Fortheproofofcorrectnessofthisalgorithm,wereferto[BFG 08].
 2.2.2 SecondParametrization:MaximumKendall-TauDistance
 Nowchoosetheparameterδ maxuv Vdist uv ,themaximumKendall-Taudistancebetweenany
 twovotesinagivenelectionE CV .Betzleretal.[BFG 08]designedadynamicprogramming
 fixed-parameteralgorithmforthisparametrization.Whenδisafixedconstant, theiralgorithmruns
 inpolynomialtime,inthetechnicalsenseofthedefinitionofpolynomialtime.Ontheotherhand,it
 shouldbenotedthatalreadyfortherathersmallvalueofδ 4,whichisfarfrombeingunrealistic
 inmanysettings, therunningtimeoftheiralgorithmamountsto49816166400 amn,wherethe
 constantaisduetotheOnotationand49816166400 3 4 1! 4 log4.Andforδ 5,we
 evenhave 3 5 1! 5 log5 242808976650240.
 Theorem2.3([BFG08])KEMENYSCOREcanbesolvedintimeO 3δ 1! δ logδm n ,
 whereδisthemaximumKendall-Taudistancebetweenanytwovotesinthegivenelection.
 Theiralgorithmusesthefollowingnotation. LetE CV beagivenelection, andletπbe
 anygivenpermutationofthecandidatesetC. Foreachc C, thepositionofcinπisthenumber
 ofcandidates rankedhigher thancinπ. Forexample, thetopcandidate inπhasposition0and
 thebottomcandidateinπhaspositionm 1. Ablockofsizeswithstartpositionp,denotedby
 blocks p , isthesetofcandidateswhosepositioninπisbetweenpandp s 1forat leastone
 π V.Letblockp blockδ 1 p .
 Letus roughlysketch theproof ideaforTheorem2.3. GivenanelectionE CV anda
 positiveintegerkasinput, thefixed-parameteralgorithmisbasedondecomposingblocksofsize
 δ 1forcomputingtheKemenyscoreofthegivenelection.Considerblock p .Everycandidate
 c blockp hasapositionthat iseither lessthanpforeachvoter inVorgreater thanp δ 1
 foreachvoter inV.Moreover, thereexistsaKemenyconsensusofEinwhichc’spositionisina
 certainrangethatdependsonδ.Thus,thealgorithmproceedsbyiteratingfromlefttorightoverthe
 givenpermutationsinV,whereitstorestheKemenyscoresforall“partialorders”ofthecandidates
 insomeblockofsizeδ 1.Candidatesthatoccurleftofthisblockmaybeignored.
 Insomemoredetail,thealgorithmconsidersineachiterationsomeblockofsizeδ 1.Initially,
 itconsidersallpossibleordersof thecandidates inblock0 andit stores inatabletheKemeny
 scoresofallsuchorderswithrespecttothesubelection block0 Vblock0 ,whereVblock0 denotes
 therestrictionofthevotersetVtothecandidatesinblock0 .Intheithiteration,i 1,thealgorithm
 considersblock i andcomputestheKemenyscoresofallordersof thecandidates inblock i by
 lookingupthetableentriesforblock i 1 .ThesizeofthetableisO 3δ 1! m. Finally, the
 KemenyscoreofEistheminimumoftheentriesforblockm δ 1 .
 Fortheformaldescriptionofthealgorithmandtheproofofcorrectness,wereferto[BFG 08].
 8
3 A Short Survey of Further FPT and Parameterized Complexity
 Results in Computational Social Choice
 In this section we survey some further FPT and parameterized complexity results for problems
 arising in computational social choice. As early as in 1989, Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick [BTT89b]
 studied NP-hard election problems for a bounded number of candidates or a bounded number
 of voters, and they obtained efficient fixed-parameter algorithm results for such cases. Within
 computational social choice, this approach of designing efficient fixed-parameter algorithms for
 hard problems was pursued in many papers, for example with respect to hard winner problems (see
 Section 2.2 and [BFG
 08, BGN08, RSV03]), with respect to hard problems related to procedural
 control [FHHR07, FHHR08, BU08], and with respect to hard problems related to bribery [FHH06]
 and lobbying [CFRS07]. In the remainder of this section, we are concerned with some of these
 results.
 3.1 FPT Results and Parameterized Complexity for Determining Dodgson and
 Young Winners
 As mentioned in Section 2.1, one of the useful properties of Kemeny’s election system is that it
 respects the notion of a Condorcet winner [Con85]. A Condorcet winner is a candidate that defeats
 every other candidate in head-to-head comparison by a strict majority of votes. It is well known that
 Condorcet winners do not always exist, but are unique when they exist. An election system E is said
 to have the Condorcet property if whenever a Condorcet winner exists, he or she is also a winner
 of E. Besides the Kemeny system, there are many other election systems that have the Condorcet
 property (see, e.g., Fishburn [Fis77]), including the systems proposed by Dodgson [Dod76] (who
 may be better known under his pen name, Lewis Carroll, the author of “Alice in Wonderland” and
 other beautiful children’s books) and Young [You77].
 Dodgson’s system works as follows. Every candidate c in a given election is assigned a score:
 the smallest number of sequential swaps of adjacent candidates in the voters’ preferences that are
 needed to make c a Condorcet winner, where swaps are counted separately for each vote and
 within each vote. Every candidate with a minimum Dodgson score wins. Clearly, a candidate
 with Dodgson score zero already is the Condorcet winner, as no swap has to be performed. Note
 that, unlike Condorcet winners, Dodgson winners always exist but are not necessarily unique.
 The decision problem DODGSON SCORE is defined as follows: Given an election E C
 designated candidate c
 V , a
 C,and a positive integer k, is it true that c’s Dodgson score is at most k?
 The decision problem DODGSON WINNER is defined as follows: Given an election E C
 a distinguished candidate c
 V and
 C,iscaDodgson winner of E?
 Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick [BTT89b] proved that DODGSON SCORE is NP-complete and that
 DODGSON WINNER is NP-hard. Hemaspaandra, Hemaspaandra, and Rothe [HHR97] optimally
 strengthened the latter result by raising the NP-hardness lower bound of this problem to match its
 obvious upper bound: DODGSON WINNER is complete for the complexity class PNP
 (the class
 capturing “parallel access to NP,” as mentioned in Section 2.1).
 Betzler, Guo, and Niedermeier [BGN08] investigated the systems by Dodgson and Young from
 a parameterized complexity perspective. In particular, they studied the complexity of DODGSON
 9
SCOREparameterizedbythenumberkofswapsneeded. Theirresultsaysthat ifthisnumberkis
 afixedconstant thenDodgsonscorescanbecomputedinpolynomial time.Notethatasmallvalue
 ofkforagivencandidatemeansthatthiscandidateisalready“close”tobeingaCondorcetwinner.
 NotethatindividualvotesinDodgsonelectionsareusuallyassumedtobe(strictly)linearorders,
 i.e., theyarepermutationsof thecandidates. Hemaspaandra,Hemaspaandra,andRothe[HHR97]
 notedthatonemayallowtiesinindividualvotesandtheysuggestedtwonaturalmodelsofhowmany
 swapsareneededinordertoalteratethecorrespondingpreferencerankings. Inthefirstmodel,we
 payonlyoneswapforchanging,say,a b cintoc a b. Inthesecondmodel,thesamechange
 costs twoswaps. Betzler,Guo, andNiedermeier [BGN08]defined thecorrespondingproblems
 ofcomputingDodgsonscoreswithtiesallowedinthesetwomodels,denotedbyDODGSONTIE
 SCORE1andDODGSONTIESCORE2. Theorem3.1lists their results forDodgsonelections.
 Interestingly, thetwomodelsforhowtohandletiesyielddifferentparameterizedcomplexities.
 Theorem3.1([BGN08]) Theproblemsmentionedbelowareparameterizedby thenumberkof
 swapsneededtomakethegivencandidateaCondorcetwinner.
 1. DODGSONSCOREcanbesolvedintimeO2k n k nm.
 2. DODGSONTIESCORE2canbesolvedintimeO4k n k nm.
 3. DODGSONTIESCORE1isW2-complete.
 Young’selectionsystem[You77]worksasfollows:AsinDodgon’ssystemthegoalistomakea
 candidatetheCondorcetwinnerviathesmallestpossiblealterationofthegivenelection.However,
 inYoungelectionsthisgoal istobeachievedbydeletingaminimumnumberofvoters. Formally,
 foranelectionE CV , theYoungscoreofacandidatec Cisdefinedtobe themaximum
 numberofvotersremaininginasubsetV ofVsuchthatcistheCondorcetwinnerinCV .Every
 candidatewithamaximumYoungscoreisaYoungwinner.Clearly,acandidatewithYoungscore
 V alreadyistheCondorcetwinner,asnovoterhastobedeleted.
 Define thedecisionproblemYOUNGSCORE as follows: GivenanelectionE CV , a
 designatedcandidatec C, andapositive integerk, is it true that c’sYoungscoreisat least k?
 Thedualprobleem,DUALYOUNGSCORE, focusesonthenumberofdeletedvoters: Givenan
 electionE CV , adesignatedcandidate c C, andapositive integer k, cancbemadea
 Condorcetwinnerbydeletingatmost kvoters fromV? Finally, thedecisionproblemYOUNG
 WINNERisdefinedasfollows:GivenanelectionE CV andadistinguishedcandidatec C,
 iscaYoungwinnerofE?Rothe,Spakowski, andVogel [RSV03]provedthat, justasKEMENY
 WINNERandDODGSONWINNER,YOUNGWINNERisPNP-complete. Theyalsoproved,witha
 linearprogramthatmodifiesanintegerlinearprogramofBartholdietal.[BTT89b],thatthewinners
 inFishburn’shomogeneous5variantofDodgson’ssystem(seeFishburn[Fis77]forthedefinition)
 canbedeterminedinpolynomial time.
 Betzler,Guo,andNiedermeier[BGN08]provedthatbothYOUNGSCOREandDUALYOUNG
 SCOREareW2-complete,wheretheparameterkistheboundonthesolutionsizesgiveninthe
 5AnelectionsystemE issaidtobehomogeneous ifforeachelection CV andforallpositiveintegersq,wehave
 ECV ECqV ,whereqVdenotesVreplicatedqtimesandECV denotesthesetofwinnersofelection CV
 accordingtosystemE.
 10
2
 instances of these problems. Containment of both problems in W
 the W
 2 is shown via a reduction to-complete problem OPTIMAL LOBBYING (which will be defined in Section 3.3). W
 hardness of YOUNG SCORE is shown via a slight modification of a reduction from the W2
 2--hard
 problem SET PACKING presented in [RSV03]. W
 via a reduction from a W2
 2-hardness of DUAL YOUNG SCORE is shown-hard variant of the dominating set problem, which is called k
 BLUE DOMINATING SET in [BGN08].
 2-RED
 Theorem 3.2 ([BGN08]) The problems mentioned below are parameterized by the size k of their
 solution sets.
 1. YOUNG SCORE is W2-complete.
 2. DUAL YOUNG SCORE is W2-complete.
 3.2 FPTResults for Procedural Control in Copeland Elections
 Copeland [Cop51] proposed an election system that is based on pairwise comparisons of candidates
 (see Merlin and Saari [SM96, MS97] for a comprehensive treatise of Copeland elections). The
 winner of such a head-to-head contest receives one point, the loser receives no point, and both
 candidates may receive tie-related points. Since the literature is a bit ambiguous on how ties in such
 head-to-head contests are to be rewarded, Faliszewski et al. [FHHR07] introduced a parameterized
 variant of Copeland elections in which ties imply that both candidates receive α points, where
 the parameter α is a rational number with 0 α
 5
 1. They denote this system by Copelandα.
 Every candidate with the most points from head-to-head contests (including tie-related points)
 is a Copelandα winner. The most common variant of “Copeland elections” in the literature is
 Copeland0
 . It is interesting to note that the system here denoted by Copeland1 was proposed
 by the philosopher and religious missionary Ramon Llull already in the thirteenth century (see the
 literature pointers in [FHHR07, FHHR08]).
 Since a Condorcet winner defeats every other candidate in head-to-head comparison, Copelandα
 possesses the Condorcet property for each rational α, 0 α 1,just like the systems proposed by
 Kemeny, Dodgson, and Young. However, unlike these three systems, the winner problem and the
 related scoring problem for Copelandα can be solved in polynomial time, and so is immediately
 f
 ixed-parameter tractable in every parametrization.
 Faliszewski et al. [FHHR07, FHHR08] studied Copelandα with respect to procedural control
 and bribery. These are settings in which an external agent (called the chair for control and the
 briber for bribery scenarios) seeks to influence the outcome of a given election either via modifying
 its structure (namely by such actions as adding/deleting/partitioning voters or candidates), or via
 bribing certain voters in order to change their votes. We here focus on procedural control of
 elections. There are 22 different control scenarios that have been studied to date; we will not
 define them here formally but rather point the reader to the papers by Bartholdi, Tovey, and
 Trick [BTT89a, BTT92], who introduced the notion of constructive control (where the chair seeks
 to make afavorite candidate win), and by Hemaspaandra, Hemaspaandra, and Rothe [HHR07], who
 were the first to study destructive control (where the chair seeks to preclude the victory of a despised
 candidate), see also [FHHR07, FHHR08].
 11
Among systems with a polynomial-time winner problem, Copeland0
 for each rational α, 0 α
 5 (and indeed Copelandα
 1) is the first natural election system proven to be fully resistant
 to constructive control [FHHR07, FHHR08] (see also [ENR08b] for a second such system), where
 “resistance” means that the corresponding control problem is NP-hard. To list just the numbers (with
 respect to the 22 different control scenarios considered) of such NP-hardness results for varying α,
 Faliszewski et al. [FHHR07, FHHR08] establish 14 resistances for Copelandα when α
 15 resistances for Copelandα when 0 α
 0
 1 ,and
 1.
 In addition, Faliszewski et al. [FHHR07, FHHR08] studied the parameterized complexity of
 these 22 control problems with respect to Copelandα for each rational α, 0 α 1.Theyconsider
 two parameterizations, namely bounding the number of candidates and bounding the number of
 voters. For each of the above-mentioned NP-hardness results, the corresponding control problem
 is fixed-parameter tractable when the number of candidates is bounded. Also, for each of the
 above-mentioned NP-hardness results for voter control problems, fixed-parameter tractability holds
 when the number of voters is bounded. However, when the number of voters is bounded, the
 corresponding candidate-control cases remain open. The proofs of these FPT results are based
 on Lenstra’s [Len83] algorithm for bounded-variable-cardinality integer programming.
 Finally, we mention that Betzler and Uhlmann [BU08] have shown a number of parameterized
 intractability results (namely W2-completeness, W2-hardness, and W1-hardness) for control by
 adding candidates and control by deleting candidates within Copelandα. In particular, they partially
 solved the above-mentioned open question raised by Faliszewski et al. [FHHR07, FHHR08]:
 Constructive and destructive control by adding candidates and by deleting candidates remains NP
hard for Copelandα, where α
 α
 0
 1 , even for a fixed number of voters. In addition, Betzler and
 Uhlmann [BU08] studied the parameterized complexity of these control problems for Copelandα,
 where 0 1isarational, and for plurality voting6 if the number of added/deleted candidates is
 viewed as a parameter.
 3.3 Parameterized Complexity for Optimal Lobbying
 Finally, we consider the problem OPTIMAL LOBBYING, another problem from computational social
 choice, albeit not related to a particular voting system. Christian et al. [CFRS07] defined this
 problem as follows: Given a 0-1 matrix (whose entries give the No/Yes votes for multiple referenda
 in the context of direct democracy), a positive integer k, and an external agent’s (called the lobby)
 0-1 target vector that gives the lobby’s desired outcome of the referenda, is it possible for the lobby
 to reach this target by flipping the votes of at most k voters? Here, a column of the matrix (which
 represents one referendum) gives the outcome Yes if and only if a strict majority of voters cast a
 Yes vote, i.e., if and only if this column has a strict majority of ones.
 The natural parametrization for this problem is the number k of voters the lobby needs to
 influence. Christian et al. [CFRS07] proved that this problem is intractable from the point of view
 of parameterized complexity: it is W2-complete. Theorem 3.3 is proven via a reduction from
 6
 In plurality, each voter gives his or her most preferred candidate one point; whoever scores the most points
 is a plurality winner. Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick [BTT92] obtained constructive control results for plurality and
 Hemaspaandra, Hemaspaandra, and Rothe [HHR07] obtained destructive and additional constructive control results for
 plurality.
 12
the W2
 2-complete problem DOMINATING SET to OPTIMAL LOBBYING (which shows OPTIMAL
 LOBBYING is W-hard) and via a reduction from OPTIMAL LOBBYING to the W2-complete
 problem INDEPENDENT DOMINATING SET (which shows OPTIMAL LOBBYING is in W
 DOMINATING SET and INDEPENDENT DOMINATING SET were defined in Section 1.
 Theorem 3.3 ([CFRS07]) OPTIMAL LOBBYING is W
 References
 [BFG
 2-complete.
 2). Both
 08] N. Betzler, M. Fellows, J. Guo, R. Niedermeier, and F. Rosamond. Fixed-parameter algorithms
 for Kemeny scores. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Algorithmic Aspects
 in Information and Management, pages 60–71. Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer
 Science #5034, June 2008.
 [BGN08] N. Betzler, J. Guo, and R. Niedermeier. Parameterized computational complexity of Dodgson
 and Young elections. In Proceedings of the 11th Scandinavian Workshop on Algorithm Theory,
 pages 402–413. Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science #5124, July 2008.
 [BI08]
 [Bla58]
 J. Buss and T. Islam. The complexity of fixed-parameterproblems. SIGACT News, 39(1):34–46,
 March 2008.
 D. Black. The Theory of Committees and Elections. Cambridge University Press, 1958.
 [BTT89a] J. Bartholdi III, C. Tovey, and M. Trick. The computational difficulty of manipulating an
 election. Social Choice and Welfare, 6(3):227–241, 1989.
 [BTT89b] J. Bartholdi III, C. Tovey, and M. Trick. Voting schemes for which it can be difficult to tell who
 won the election. Social Choice and Welfare, 6(2):157–165, 1989.
 [BTT92]
 [BU08]
 [CF03]
 J. Bartholdi III, C. Tovey, and M. Trick. How hard is it to control an election? Mathematical
 Comput. Modelling, 16(8/9):27–40,1992.
 N. Betzler and J. Uhlmann. Parameterized complexity of candidate control in elections and
 related digraph problems. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual International Conference on
 Combinatorial Optimization and Applications. Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer
 Science, July 2008. To appear.
 Y. Chen andJ. Flum. Machinecharacterizationof the classes of the W-hierarchy. In Proceedings
 of the 17th InternationalWorkshop on ComputerScience Logic, pages114–127.Springer-Verlag
 Lecture Notes in Computer Science #2803, August 2003.
 [CFG03] Y. Chen, J. Flum, and M. Grohe. Bounded nondeterminism and alternation in parameterized
 complexity theory. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational
 Complexity, pages 13–29. IEEE Computer Society Press, July 2003.
 [CFRS07] R. Christian, M. Fellows, F. Rosamond, and A. Slinko. On complexity of lobbying in multiple
 referenda. Review of Economic Design, 11(3):217–224,2007.
 [Con85]
 J.-A.-N. de Caritat, Marquis de Condorcet. Essai sur l’application de l’analyse ` a la probabilit´ e
 des d´ ecisions rendues ` a la pluralit´ e des voix. 1785. Facsimile reprint of original published in
 Paris, 1972, by the Imprimerie Royale. English translation appears in I. McLean and A. Urken,
 Classics of Social Choice, University of Michigan Press, 1995, pages 91–112.
 13
[Cop51]
 [DF99]
 A. Copeland. A “reasonable” social welfare function. Mimeographed notes from a Seminar on
 Applications of Mathematics to the Social Sciences, University of Michigan, 1951.
 R. Downey and M. Fellows. Parameterized Complexity. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,
 NewYork, 1999.
 [DKNS01] C. Dwork, R. Kumar, M. Naor, and D. Sivakumar. Rank aggregation methods for the web. In
 Proc. WWW’01, pages 613–622.ACM Press, 2001.
 [Dod76]
 C. Dodgson. A method of taking votes on more than two issues. Pamphlet printed by the
 Clarendon Press, Oxford, and headed“not yet published”(see the discussions in [MU95, Bla58],
 both of which reprint this paper), 1876.
 [ENR08a] G. Erd´ elyi, M. Nowak, and J. Rothe. Sincere-strategy preference-based approval voting
 broadly resists control. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Symposium on Mathematical
 Foundations of Computer Science, pages 311–322. Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer
 Science #5162, August 2008.
 [ENR08b] G. Erd´ elyi, M. Nowak, and J. Rothe. Sincere-strategy preference-based approval voting
 fully resists constructive control and broadly resists destructive control. Technical Report
 cs.GT/0806.0535, ACM Computing Research Repository (CoRR), June 2008. A precursor
 appeared as [ENR08a].
 [ER93]
 [FG06]
 E. Ephrati and J. Rosenschein. Multi-agent planning as a dynamic search for social consensus.
 In Proc. IJCAI’93, pages 423–429, 1993.
 J. Flum and M. Grohe. Parameterized Complexity Theory. EATCS Texts in Theoretical
 Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.
 [FHH06] P.Faliszewski, E. Hemaspaandra,and L. Hemaspaandra. The complexityof briberyin elections.
 In Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 641–646.AAAI
 Press, July 2006.
 [FHHR07] P. Faliszewski, E. Hemaspaandra, L. Hemaspaandra, and J. Rothe. Llull and Copeland voting
 broadly resist bribery and control. In Proceedings of the 22nd AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, pages 724–730. AAAI Press, July 2007.
 [FHHR08] P. Faliszewski, E. Hemaspaandra, L. Hemaspaandra, and J. Rothe. Copeland voting fully resists
 constructive control. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Algorithmic Aspects
 in Information and Management, pages 165–176. Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer
 Science #5034, June 2008.
 [Fis77]
 [FKS03]
 [GJ79]
 P. Fishburn. Condorcet social choice functions. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics,
 33(3):469–489, 1977.
 R. Fagin, R. Kumar, and D. Sivakumar. Efficient similarity search and classification via rank
 aggregation. In Proc. ACM SIGMOD Intern. Conf. on Management of Data, pages 301–312.
 ACMPress, 2003.
 M. Garey and D. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP
Completeness. W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, 1979.
 [GMHS99] S. Ghosh, M. Mundhe, K. Hernandez, and S. Sen. Voting for movies: The anatomy of
 recommender systems. In Proc. 3rd Annual Conference on Autonomous Agents, pages 434
435. ACM Press, 1999.
 14
[HHR97] E.Hemaspaandra,L. Hemaspaandra, and J. Rothe. Exact analysis of Dodgson elections: Lewis
 Carroll’s 1876 voting system is complete for parallel access to NP. Journal of the ACM,
 44(6):806–825, November 1997.
 [HHR07] E. Hemaspaandra, L. Hemaspaandra, and J. Rothe. Anyone but him: The complexity of
 precluding an alternative. Artificial Intelligence, 171(5–6):255–285,2007.
 [HSV05] E. Hemaspaandra, H. Spakowski, and J. Vogel. The complexity of Kemeny elections.
 Theoretical Computer Science, 349(3):382–391,December 2005.
 [Kem59] J.Kemeny. Mathematics without numbers. Dædalus, 88:571–591,1959.
 [KS60]
 [Len83]
 [MS97]
 [MU95]
 [Nie06]
 [Pap94]
 [Rot05]
 [RR06]
 J. Kemeny and L. Snell. Mathematical Models in the Social Sciences. Ginn, 1960.
 H. Lenstra Jr. Integerprogrammingwith a fixed numberof variables. Mathematicsof Operations
 Research, 8:538–548, 1983.
 V. Merlin and D. Saari. Copeland method II: Manipulation, monotonicity, and paradoxes.
 Journal of Economic Theory, 72(1):148–172,1997.
 I. McLean and A. Urken. Classics of Social Choice. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor,
 Michigan, 1995.
 R. Niedermeier. Invitation to Fixed-Parameter Algorithms. Oxford University Press, 2006.
 C. Papadimitriou. Computational Complexity. Addison-Wesley, 1994.
 J. Rothe. Complexity Theory and Cryptology. An Introduction to Cryptocomplexity. EATCS
 Texts in Theoretical Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 2005.
 T. Riege and J. Rothe. Complexity of the exact domatic number problem and of the exact
 conveyor flow shop problem. Theory of Computing Systems, 39(5):635–668,September 2006.
 [RSV03] J. Rothe, H. Spakowski, and J. Vogel. Exact complexity of the winner problem for Young
 elections. Theory of Computing Systems, 36(4):375–386,June 2003.
 [SM96]
 [You77]
 D. Saari and V. Merlin. The Copeland method I: Relationships and the dictionary. Economic
 Theory, 8(1):51–76, 1996.
 H. Young. Extending Condorcet’s rule. Journal of Economic Theory, 16(2):335–353,1977.
 1